{"id": "17276502", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17276502", "title": "Ordo Rachelis", "text": "Ordo Rachelis\n\nThe Ordo Rachelis (Play of Rachel), Interfectio Puerorum (Murder of the Children), or Ludus Innocentium (Play of the Innocents) is a medieval dramatic tradition consisting in four plays and based on the Massacre of the Innocents, an event recorded in the Gospel of Matthew, and on the prophecy recorded in the Book of Jeremiah: \"A voice was heard in Ramah, lamentation, and bitter weeping; Rahel weeping for her children refused to be comforted for her children, because they were not\" (31:15, KJV). The prophecy, which Matthew believed to be fulfilled when Herod the Great ordered the slaughter of all boys under two in Bethlehem, looks backwards to Rachel, the matriarch of the Hebrews, and towards her lamentation over the death of her children, the Hebrew children, in the massacre.\n\nThe \"Ordo Rachelis\" plays were probably performed as part of the liturgy for Innocents Day (28 December).\n\nThe first modern critical edition of the Rachel plays was made by Karl Young in 1919. Young believed the plays developed from dramatic kernels in the Epiphany plays of the ninth and tenth centuries into full dramatic treatments of their own in the eleventh and twelfth. The four extensive treatments which Young classified as \"ordines Rachelis\" differ considerably. There are the \"Lamentatio Rachelis\" from Saint-Martial at Limoges (eleventh century), a lengthy part of an Epiphany play from Laon (twelfth century), a play from Freising (late eleventh century), and another one from Fleury (thirteenth century). Only the last two can be regarded as \"separate dramatic unit[s]\". In both of them the \"fuga in Egyptum\" and the \"pastores\" themes have been incorporated, and the Fleury play contains the only extant medieval dramatic representation of the return from Egypt. Chambers has gone so far as to suggest a coalescing of all the Epiphany themes in the Fleury \"ordo\" and of a merging of the Rachel and Herod (\"Herodes\") themes in the Freising.\n\nThe late eleventh-century manuscript of the Limoges \"ordo\" is now lat. 1139 in the Bibliothèque nationale de France, Paris, which contains many liturgical pieces, including the play \"Sponsus\". The Fleury version is preserved in the famous Fleury Playbook, an important eleventh-century compilation of liturgical drama.\n\nAs to the origins of the tradition Karl Young concluded, like before him (\"Die lateinischen Magierspiele\", 1905), that it was initially an independent trope at Limoges and then appended to the \"Officium stellae\" at Laon, representing a French tradition. This tradition was merged with a German one that arose at Freising at Fleury, though the ecclesiastical affairs that brought about this transmission (from Laon, Limoges, and Freising to Fleury) are unknown. Young differs from Anz in that the latter thought the Freising text also developed from the Limoges original. An older theory of origins was put forth by William Meyer (\"Fragmenta Burana\", 1901). He hypothesised that a south German original, large and complex, disintegrated into a Freising play that was largely a whittled-down copy and three divergent French plays that were influenced by the French liturgy.\n\nPeter Dronke believes it was to the dialogic poem \"Quid tu, virgo\" by Notker the Stammerer, written probably in the 860s, that the eleventh-century dramatists were responding with their Rachel sequences.\n\nThe Rachel of the play is symbolically every Hebrew mother who lost her child to the massacre. In the Freising version, she opens the action by singing a \"planctus\" over her children's bodies before a \"consolatrix\" (female comforter) arrives to soothe her spirit. In the Fleury version, she sings a series of four \"plancti\" before two \"consolatrices\" come out to catch her as she faints. The \"consolatrices\" fail to comfort her, but lead her away. In both versions they sing the final lines. In the Fleury version the drama began with a procession of young boys \"per monasterium\" (down the aisle of the church's nave) and a lamb bearing a cross appears running \"to and fro\" (\"huc et illuc\"). Then the action shifts to Herod receiving his sceptre and Joseph at the manger receiving a message from Gabriel to flee to Egypt. Joseph and the holy family exit secretly while Herod attempts suicide as news is brought that the Magi avoided telling him the Christ child's location. After he regains his composure, he orders the massacre. The lamb is then led off stage and the massacre begins, despite the pleas of the mothers and the children to the angels above. After the Rachel scenes, an angel conducts the children to the choir and a dumb show shows Herod being succeeded as king by Archelaus before the holy family returns from Egypt. The entire Fleury play ends with a singing of the \"Te Deum\".\n\n"}
{"id": "17293447", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17293447", "title": "Date square", "text": "Date square\n\nA date square is a Canadian dessert or coffee accompaniment made of cooked dates with an oatmeal crumb topping. In Western Canada it is known as Matrimonial Cake.. In Eastern Canada and Newfoundland it might also be known as Date Crumbles . It is often found in coffee shops as a sweet snack food. There can be nuts added to the base layer or crumb topping, or other alterations . There can be candied peel added to the date stuffing for a contrasting texture.. \n\nHistory and origins\n\nThere is debate over the origins of the date square/Matrimonial Cake/Date Crumbles. Many individuals in Canada recognize it as a home-cooked treat that has always been around and is now somewhat old-fashioned, though beloved. Some attribute it to Scottish heritage, as much of Western Canada was settled by Scottish explorers working for the Hudson's Bay Trading Co. The use of oats makes this seem a point in favour of this idea. However, this recipe also appears to be traditional in Quebec, where the French influence would be dominant, and is also well known in Newfoundland, where historically Irish influence would have been important. Thus this recipe appears to have become truly \"Canadian\" with its origins obscured in time.\n\n"}
{"id": "17310869", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17310869", "title": "Swaminarayan (spiritual tradition)", "text": "Swaminarayan (spiritual tradition)\n\nSwaminarayan Sampraday, also known as the \"Swaminarayan faith\" or the \"Swaminarayan sect\", originating in the state of Gujarat, in which followers offer devotion to and worship Swaminarayan as a form of Parabrahma.\nThe Swaminarayan faith has a large percentage of Gujarati Hindus who are followers of Swaminarayan.\n\nConsidered a Vaishnava Bhakti sect following philosophical teachings of Uddhava as per Ramanujacharya. Since its origin, Swaminarayan Sampraday has been noted by its preservation of Gujarati cultural and linguistic traditions, devotion to the personality of Swaminarayan as supreme deity and the reason of all avtārs, dedication to social service and a strict ethical code including uncompromising segregation of the genders. Monier Williams, on at least one of his visits, had long discussions with Swaminarayan and his followers and did his best to ascertain the way Swaminarayan's principles were preached. He visited the temple in Vadtal in the company of the Collector of Karira during a popular Kartik Purnima festival that took place there and recorded the basics. Those who are initiated into proper worship of Krishna deity are instructed to wear a Tulasi kanti or rosary beads in two rows around their necks, one for Krishna and one for Radha. Followers are also instructed to chant the mantra of \"\" (great Krishna is my soul's refuge) and wear Urdhva Pundra Tilak markings on their forehead. Daily worship of Krishna in the temple was instructed and the Krishna mantra was central to the Swaminarayan's initiation (\"diksa\"). Supreme Being is believed to be referred by various names: Para Brahman, Bhagavan and Purushottama. While no detailed statistical information is available, most of the followers of Swaminarayan share a belief that Swaminarayan is the complete manifestation of Narayana or the supreme person and more superior to other avatars.\n\nSwaminarayan teachings are sometimes categorized as monotheism. Unlike most other Vaishnavite schools such as those of Ramanuja, Madhva and Chaitanya, Swaminarayan, although leaning in preference towards Vishnu/Krishna, did not differentiate between Vishnu and Shiva; moreover, he followed a Smarta approach (scripture-sanctioned deities are viewed as different manifestations of the same Brahman) by instructing his followers to venerate all five deities of the Panchayatana puja with equal reverence. Verse 84 of Shikshapatri, a key scripture to all followers of the Swaminarayan faith, makes reference to the Smarta-like belief.\nIn making no distinction between Vishnu and Shiva, Swaminarayan, held that Vishnu and Shiva are different aspects of the same God, instead of according Shiva a lower status as Madhva and Ramanuja had done, for example. Verse 47 of the Shikshapatri, makes reference to this belief.\n\nFollowers of Swaminarayan believe that it was events that took place at Badarikashram, the abode of Nara Narayana, that led to the incarnation of Swaminarayan. It is believed that Narayana took birth as Swaminarayan due to a curse of sage Durvasa Muni which he accepted at his own will. The curse led to Narayana taking the form of an avatar on Earth to destroy evil and establish \"ekantik-dharma\", religion based on morality, knowledge, detachment and devotion. Important Hindu scriptures such as the Bhagavad Gita and Bhagavata Purana confirm that Narayana descends in human form to destroy evil though there is no direct reference to Swaminarayan. He was a human & then a sage or philosopher. Only the Swaminarayan followers specifically interpret the Visvaksena Samhita, 11th part of the Brahma Purana, as well as the Skanda Purana as giving a direct reference to Narayana taking birth in the form of Swaminarayan. None of the Puranas even mention \"Swaminarayan\". In the liturgy of the sect, the story of the announcement of the coming birth of Krishna in the Bhagavata Purana is similar to the story of the birth of Swaminarayan, and merging of the images and stories of Swaminarayan and Krishna has occurred. Some people believe him to be reincarnation of lord Krishna. Krishna promised to come back in Govardhans & he did in form of Shreenathji.\nIn Vaishnava theology Uddhava, who is considered to be the chief disciple of Krishna, was ordained to spread his message in a future birth, and some groups of Swaminarayan Faith believe that he reappeared as Ramananda Swami to prepare the way for another manifestation of Krishna. Swaminarayan is said to have intimated that he was a manifestation of God Supreme in a meeting with the Reginald Heber, the Lord Bishop of Calcutta, in 1825.\n\nThe basic principle of the philosophy of Swaminarayan is \"vishistadvaita\" (qualified non-dualism) as propounded by Ramanujacharya.\n\nSome did not understand and rebel against the notion of Swaminarayan's worship of Krishna while Swaminarayan also considered himself to be a manifestation of God. It is believed by his followers that just as Krishna assumed as many forms as the number of divine maidens (gopis) with whom he danced, he may have manifested himself simultaneously in many forms.\n\nAfter the death of his parents, Ghanshyam Pande left his home on 29 June 1792 (Ashadh Sud 10, Samvat 1849) at the age of 11. He took the name Nilkanth Varni while on his journey. Nilkanth Varni travelled across India and parts of Nepal in search of an ashram, or hermitage, that practiced what he considered a correct understanding of Vedanta, Samkhya, Yoga, and Pancaratra, the four primary schools of Hindu philosophy. To find such an ashram, Nilkanth Varni asked the following five questions on the basic Vaishnava Vedanta categories:\n\n\nWhile on his journey, Nilkanth Varni mastered \"Astanga yoga\" (eightfold yoga) in a span of 9 months under the guidance of an aged yogic master named Gopal Yogi. In Nepal, it is said that he met King Rana Bahadur Shah and cured him of his stomach illness. As a result, the king freed all the ascetics he had imprisoned. Nilkanth Varni visited the Jagannath Temple in Puri as well as temples in Badrinath, Rameshwaram, Nashik, Dwarka and Pandharpur.\n\nIn 1799, after a seven-year journey, Nilkanth's travels as a yogi eventually concluded in Loj, a village in the Junagadh district of Gujarat. In Loj, Nilkanth Varni met Muktanand Swami, a senior disciple of Ramanand Swami. Muktanand Swami, who was twenty-two years older than Nilkanth, answered the five questions to Nilkanth's satisfaction. Nilkanth decided to stay for the opportunity to meet Ramanand Swami, whom he met a few months after his arrival in Gujarat. He later claimed in the Vachnamrut that during this period, he took up a severe penance to eliminate his mothers flesh and blood from his body so that the sign of his physical attachment to family, was completely removed.\n\nSwaminarayan propagated general Hindu texts. He held the Bhagavata Purana in high authority. However, there are many texts that were written by Swaminarayan or his followers that are regarded as shastras or scriptures within the Swaminarayan sect. Notable scriptures throughout the sect include the \"Shikshapatri\" and the \"Vachanamrut\". Other important works and scriptures include the \"Satsangi Jeevan\", Swaminarayan's authorized biography, the \"Muktanand Kavya\", the \"Nishkulanand Kavya\" and the \"Bhakta Chintamani\".\n\n\nSwaminarayan wrote the \"Shikshapatri\" on 11 February 1826. While the original Sanskrit manuscript is not available, it was translated into Gujarati by Nityanand Swami under the direction of Swaminarayan and is revered in the sect. The Gazetteer of the Bombay Presidency summarised it as a book of social laws that his followers should follow. A commentary on the practice and understanding of dharma, it is a small booklet containing 212 Sanskrit verses, outlining the basic tenets that Swaminarayan believed his followers should uphold in order to live a well-disciplined and moral life. The oldest copy of this text is preserved at the Bodleian Library of Oxford University and it is one of the very few presented by Sahajanand Swami himself. Acharya Tejendraprasad of Ahmedabad has indicated in a letter that he is not aware of any copy from the hand of Sahajanand older than this text.\n\n\nSwaminarayan's philosophical, social and practical teachings are contained in the \"Vachanamrut\", a collection of dialogues recorded by five prominent saints (Muktanand Swami, Gopalanand Swami, Nityanand Swami, Shukanand Muni, & Brahmanand Swami) from his spoken words. The \"Vachanamrut\" is the scripture most commonly used in the Swaminarayan sect. It contains views on \"dharma\" (moral conduct), \"jnana\" (understanding of the nature of the self), \"vairagya\" (detachment from material pleasure), and \"bhakti\" (pure, selfless devotion to God), the four essentials Hindu scriptures describe as necessary for a \"jiva\" (soul) to attain \"moksha\" (salvation).\n\n\nSatsangi Jeevan is the authorised biography of Swaminarayan. The book contains information on the life and teachings of Swaminarayan. It is written by Shatanand Swami and completed in Vikram Samvat 1885. Swaminarayan decided to make Gadhada his permanent residence on the insistence of Dada Khachar and his sisters.Swaminarayan instructed Shatanand Swami to write a book on his life and pastimes.\n\nTo enable Shatanand swami to write from His childhood, Swaminarayan had blessed Shatanand Swami with Sanjay Drishti – special power to see the entire past right from His childhood.\n\nOnce written by Shatanand Swami, this book was verified and authenticated by Swaminarayan. He was much pleased to read the book. Swaminarayan then asked his disciples to do Katha of Satsangi Jeevan\n\nPrior to his death, Sahajanand Swami decided to establish a line of \"acharyas\", or preceptors as his spiritual successors. After his death several divisions occurred with different understandings of the succession of leadership.\n\nSwaminarayan established two \"gadis\" (seats of leadership). One seat was established in Ahmedabad (Nar Narayan Dev Gadi) and the other one in Vadtal (Laxmi Narayan Dev Gadi) on 21 November 1825. He appointed an \"acharya\" to each of these two \"gadis\" to pass on his message to others and to preserve his fellowship, Swaminarayan Sampraday. These \"acharyas\" came from his immediate family; he formally adopted a son from each of his two brothers, Rampratap and Ichcharam, and appointed them to the office of \"acharya\". Ayodhyaprasad, son of his DESIGNATED brother Rampratap, was appointed \"acharya\" of Ahmedabad Gadi, and Raghuvira, son of his younger brother Ichcharam, was appointed \"acharya\" of the Vadtal Gadi. Swaminarayan decreed that the office should be hereditary so that \"acharyas\" would maintain a direct line of blood descent from his family. The administrative division of his followers into two territorial dioceses is set forth in minute detail in a document written by Swaminarayan called Desh Vibhaag Lekh. The current \"acharyas\" of the Swaminarayan Sampraday are Koshalendraprasad Pande, of the Ahmedabad Gadi, and Rakeshprasad Pande, of the Vadtal Gadi.\n\nAfter his death several divisions occurred with different understandings of the succession of leadership. Apart from this, there has been some conflicts in the Sampraday itself. Controversy over \"Vadtal gadi\" had attracted attention of national media in the past. Besides these the sects has produced a number of schismatic groups.\n\n\"Bochasanwasi Shri Akshar Purushottam Swaminarayan Sanstha\" (BAPS) followers hold Gunatitanand Swami as the spiritual successor to Swaminarayan. Members of BAPS assert that on several occasions Swaminarayan revealed to devotees that Gunatitanand Swami was Aksharbrahm manifest. These instances claimed by the devotees of BAPS have come to embody the philosophy known as Akshar Purushottam Upasana. It was in 1907 that a prominent ascetic named Shastri Yagnapurushdas separated from the parent organization and established this institution, claiming Gunatitanand Swami as the rightful successor. Yagnapurushdas, who formed the schism, is believed by the devotees of BAPS to be the third spiritual successor of Swaminarayan. The current leader of BAPS is Keshavjivandasji, more commonly known as Mahant Swami.\n\nThe followers of the \"Shree Swaminarayan Gadi Sansthan\" believe that Gopalanand Swami was the spiritual successor to Swaminarayan. This difference in belief of succession led to the creation of Swaminarayan Gadi in 1941. The current leader of the Swaminarayan Gadi is Acharya Purushottampriyadas.\n\nAnother group who share the same beliefs with the Gadi Sansthan is the Swaminarayan Mandir Vasna Sanstha (SMVS). The group's founder is Devnandandas Swami.\n\nThe Gunatit Samaj was formed in 1966 due to beliefs in regards to women living their lives as ascetics like the saints in Safrron-clad. This belief was instilled by the spiritual head of BAPS at the time, Yogiji Maharaj who had a wish for women to also dedicate their lives to the service of God (like their male counterparts) this wish had been expressed to Pappaji and Kakaji (Founders of the Gunatit Samaj) in 1952 after a question was posed by Pappaji to Yogiji Maharaj regarding Sonaba's (A founder of the Gunatit Samaj) daughters who wanted to lead a life dedicated to God. Yogiji Maharaj had given his blessings regarding what path the two sisters should take; \"\"Beno bhagwan bhaje to shu khotu? Maharaj jog gothavi apashe ane e jog e karya tamare karvanu che.”\" (What is wrong if [these] sisters want to devote their lives to God? Maharaj [Swaminarayan Bhagwan] will ensure that this will happen, and further more you are to undertake this task.”).\n\nThereafter, a separate establishment was established in Vallabh Vidyanagar by Pappaji, his brother, Kakaji and Sonaba whose daughters were the first two to join the establishment ordained in the saffron-clad, they were then followed by two others and a total of 51 women had joined the establishment in 1966. Heavy opposition was received from members of the BAPS sect and as a result, Pappaji and Kakaji were excommunicated from BAPS by trustee members. \n\nMany were also in support of the establishment for the uplifment of women leading their lives as ascetics and thus 40 Sadhus initiated by Yogiji Maharaj who expressed support of Kakaji and Pappaji had also left. The youth in the Akshar-Purushottam Hostel (Chhatralay) in Vallabh Vidyanagar had also been asked to vacate due to showing support and taking the words of the two brothers as the commands of Yogiji Maharaj. Despite efforts between Kakaji, Pappaji and senior saints at BAPS a firm resolution couldn't be met. The Gunatit Samaj now spans worldwide with centres in the United States, UK, Canada, Germany, Australia, France and many other countries. Each wing is respectively lead under a spiritual head who is in ontological terminology, Akshar Brahman - the manifestation of Lord Swaminarayan.\n\nThe Saints wing known as Yogi Divine Society is being led by Hariprasad Swami and also Aksharvihari Swami who leads saints in Sankarda under the name of Akshar-Purushottam Satsang Kendra. The dedicated women's wing is led by Pappaji in Vallabh Vidyanagar under the name of Gunatit Jyot. The Dedicated [Youth] Brothers wing is led by Jashbhai Saheb in Vallabh Vidyanagar under the name of Anoopam Mission. Each of the mentioned sub-groups include a Dedicated Householders wing, together forming a four winged society.\n\n"}
{"id": "17317714", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17317714", "title": "Origin Enterprises", "text": "Origin Enterprises\n\nOrigin Enterprises plc is a focused agri-services group providing specialist on-farm agronomy services and the supply of crop technologies and inputs. The group has leading market positions in Ireland, the United Kingdom, Poland, Romania and Ukraine. Origin is listed on the ESM () market of Euronext Dublin.\n\nOrigin was established by the IAWS Group in 2006 to focus on the original agribusiness and food and nutrition businesses of IAWS: it was admitted to the IEX and AIM on 5 June 2007. In October 2013 it bought 60% of Agroscope, a Ukrainian business, for $17.6m. Then in September 2015 it completed the acquisition of Romania's Redoxim. \n\nIn November 2015, it completed the acquisition of Kazgod group in Poland and in December 2015, it completed the acquisition of Comfert S.R.L. in Romania. In June 2018, it announced an agreement to expand your footprint within South America, buying a sharehold part of two Brazilian companies, by €50.3m.\n\nAgri-services businesses include:\n\n"}
{"id": "17326499", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17326499", "title": "Climate of Ireland", "text": "Climate of Ireland\n\nThe climate of Ireland is mild, moist and changeable with abundant rainfall and a lack of temperature extremes. Ireland's climate is defined as a temperate oceanic climate, or \"Cfb\" on the Köppen climate classification system, a classification it shares with most of northwest Europe. The country receives generally cool summers and mild winters. It is considerably warmer than other areas on its latitude, because it lies in the northeastern Atlantic Ocean, and as a result is warmed by the North Atlantic Current all year.\n\nAs a small island downwind of a large ocean, the climate of Ireland is profoundly impacted by that ocean. The Atlantic overturning circulation, which includes ocean currents such as the North Atlantic Current, moves heat northwards, which is then carried by the prevailing winds towards Ireland.\n\nThe prevailing wind blows from the southwest, breaking on the high mountains of the west coast. Rainfall is therefore a particularly prominent part of western Irish life, with Valentia Island, off the west coast of County Kerry, getting almost twice as much annual rainfall as Dublin on the east ( vs. ).\n\nJanuary and February are the coldest months of the year, and mean daily air temperatures fall between during these months. July and August are the warmest, with mean daily temperatures of , whilst mean daily maximums in July and August vary from near the coast, to inland. The sunniest months are May and June, with an average of five to seven hours sunshine per day. Though extreme weather events in Ireland are comparatively rare when compared with other countries in the European Continent, they do occur. Atlantic depressions, occurring mainly in the months of December, January and February, can occasionally bring winds of up to to Western coastal counties, with the winter of 2013/14 being the stormiest on record. During the summer months, and particularly around late July/early August, thunderstorms can develop.\n\nIreland experiences a lack of temperature extremes compared to other areas at similar latitudes. There is regional variation, with inland areas being cooler in winter and warmer in summer than their coastal counterparts.\n\nThe warmest areas are found along the southwest coast. Valentia Island has the highest average temperature, at 10.9 °C.\n\nThe coldest areas are found inland. Mullingar has the lowest average temperature, at 9.3 °C\n\nThe highest temperature ever recorded in Ireland was 33.3 °C at Kilkenny Castle, on 26 June 1887. The lowest temperature was -19.1 °C at Markree Castle on 16 January 1881.\n\nSix of the warmest ten years in Ireland have occurred since 1990. Due to climate change, it is estimated that the temperatures will rise everywhere of up to 3.4 degrees by the end of the century. \n\nExtreme heat and cold are both rare throughout the country. Summer temperatures exceed 30 °C usually once or twice every decade (2018, 2016, 2013, 2006, 2005, 2003, 1995, 1990, 1989, 1983, 1976 and 1975 are recent examples), although they commonly reach the high 20s most summers, while severe freezes occur only occasionally in winter, with temperatures below -10 °C being very uncommon in the lowlands, and temperatures below freezing uncommon in many coastal areas, although temperatures in the Wicklow Mountains are said to reach -10 °C annually.\n\nAir frost occurs frequently in the winter, with most areas seeing over 40 days of air frost every year. In northern areas, air frost occurs on average 10.2 days every January, the month in which air frost occurs most frequently. In the Sperrins and the Glens of Antrim air frost occurs around 80 days a year. The pattern is similar with ground frost, with on average around 100 days of ground frost in the lowlands and over 140 in the mountains.The number of frost days in Ireland have declined massively over the past decade.The largest season decrease has been known to take place in winter.\n\nFrost is rarer along the coast, in urban areas and also in western and southern areas.\n\nRoches Point, County Cork receives the least number of days with air frost, with an average of 7.0 days with air frost recorded annually.\n\nKilkenny, County Kilkenny receives the highest number of days with air frost, with an average of 53.0 days with air frost recorded annually.\n\nIn Dublin, Dublin Airport records air frost on average 24.3 days per year, while Casement Aerodrome (which is further inland) records air frost on average 41.3 days per year.\n\nThe sunniest months are May and June. During these months sunshine duration averages between 5 and 6½ hours per day over most of the country. The southeast gets the most sunshine, averaging over 7 hours a day in early summer. December is the most overcast month, with an average daily sunshine ranging from about 1 hour in the north to almost 2 hours in the southeast. Over the year as a whole most areas get an average of between 3¼ and 3¾ hours of sunshine each day. Irish skies are completely covered by cloud roughly half of the time.\n\nThe sunniest part of the island is the southeast coast. Rosslare, County Wexford is the sunniest area, and receives on average 4.38 hours of sunshine per day (1,598.41 hours per year).\nThe cloudiest (i.e. least sunny) parts of the island are generally the west and northwest of the country. However, Birr, County Offaly, in the midlands, is the most cloudy (overcast) station, receiving on average 3.2 hours of sunshine per day, considerably less than the stations at Malin Head in the north or Belmullet in the west.\nInland areas tend to receive less sunshine than coastal areas due to the convective development of clouds over land. Cloud develops because of vertical air currents caused by thermal heating of the ground.\n\nRainfall is the most common form of precipitation on the island, and is extremely common throughout Ireland, although some parts of the west coast receive over four times as much rain as the east coast. Rainfall in Ireland normally comes from Atlantic frontal systems which travel northeast over the island, bringing cloud and rain. Most of the eastern half of the country has between of rainfall in the year. Rainfall in the west generally averages between . In many mountainous districts rainfall exceeds per year. The wettest months almost everywhere are December and January. April is the driest month generally, but in many southern parts June is the driest.\n\nThe average number of \"wet days\" (days with more than of rain) ranges from about 151 days a year along the east and southeast coasts, to about 225 days a year in parts of the west.\n\nThe wettest weather station is Valentia Island, which receives of rain per year, on average.\n\nThe driest weather station is Casement Aerodrome, which receives of rain per year, on average.\n\nThe weather station with the highest number of \"wet days\" is Belmullet, with 193 days per year, while the station with the lowest number of \"wet days\" is Dublin Airport, with 128 days per year.\n\nSource:\n\nSevere cold weather is uncommon in Ireland with the majority of winter precipitation coming in the form of rain, although hills and mountainous regions in the country can commonly see up to 30 days of snowfall annually, with the Wicklow Mountains sometimes seeing 50 or more days of snowfall annually. Most low-lying regions of the island only see a few days of lying snow per year (from December to March inclusive), or may see no snow at all during some winters.\n\nHowever, there are preparations for snow and ice, including the distribution of grit, salt, and other snow-treatable minerals. In late 2011, the Irish Government set up \"Winter-Ready\", in order to prepare the country for such severe weather.\n\nDue to the variability of Ireland's weather (which is mainly because of the influence of the Atlantic Ocean, Gulf Stream and North Atlantic Drift, as well as Ireland's northerly latitude and vulnerability to Siberian/Arctic winds) weather during the winter months is difficult to predict, with the aforementioned factors making both extremely low temperatures and relatively mild temperatures possible.\n\nThe snowiest weather station is Clones, County Monaghan, which receives, on average, nearly 30 days of snow and/or sleet per year. Of these, 10.8 days have snow lying at 09:00. The least snowy weather station is Valentia Island, County Kerry; which receives, on average, 5.6 days of snow and/or sleet per year. Of these, 0.8 days have snow lying at 09:00.\n\nHail, like snow and sleet, is also rare in Ireland; however, it can occur at any time of the year. It is most common in spring during thunderstorms.\n\nMalin Head, County Donegal receives the most hail, with an average of 48.4 days per year.\n\nRoches Point, County Cork receives the least hail, with an average of 8.0 days per year.\n\nThunderstorms are quite rare in Ireland. They are more likely to happen late in summer, although they can occur at any time of the year.\n\nCork Airport, County Cork experiences the least thunder; receiving it 3.7 days per year on average.\n\nValentia Island, County Kerry experiences the most thunder; receiving it 7.1 days per year on average.\n\nGenerally, the coast tends to be windier than inland areas; and the west tends to be windier than the east.\n\nThe station with the highest mean wind speed is Malin Head, County Donegal; averaging at . Malin Head also receives the most gale-force winds, recording them on average 66.0 days per year.\n\nThe station with the lowest mean wind speed is Kilkenny, County Kilkenny; averaging at .\n\nThe station that records the lowest number of gale-force winds is Birr, County Offaly; recording them on average 1.2 days per year.\n\nThe highest wind speed ever recorded in Ireland was at Fastnet Lighthouse, County Cork on 16 October 2017.\n\nTornadoes are very rare in Ireland, with around less than ten reported every year - mostly in August.\n\nFog is more common inland and on higher altitudes; mainly during winter and during the morning at times of high pressure.\n\nThe foggiest station is that at Cork Airport, County Cork, which has 99.5 days of fog per year.\n\nThe least foggy station is that at Valentia Island, County Kerry, which has 8.9 days of fog per year.\n\nVisibility is generally very good, because of the proximity of industry to the coast, allowing breezes to disperse any smog. Mist and fog often occur, as well as coastal fog in the east, but it is generally not long-lasting. However, in winter, it can be slow to clear.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "17328195", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17328195", "title": "Yashaswi", "text": "Yashaswi\n\nYashaswi is a Sanskrit word that can be used as either a noun or a verb. It can also be spelt as Yashasvi or Yeshaswi. It means \"eternal success or fame for eternity\".\n\nNaming a boy Yashaswi generally means wishing them to be victorious or glorious or famous or successful. Its feminine counterpart on the other hand is Yashaswini . Person with name \n\nYashaswi are mainly Hindu by religion. Name Yashaswi belongs to rashi Vrushik (Scorpio) and Nakshatra (stars) Jyeshta.\n\nYashaswi has its origination from the Sanskrit word \"Yashaswin\". The word was used frequently in blessings as \"Yashaswi Bhava\" during Vedic times by rishis and sages to bless kings.\n\nThis is one of the given names that prevails in Karnataka, Uttar Pradesh as well as other states occupied by Hindu population.\n\nYashaswi is a name which is used by mainly Indians and other Hindu people, such as Nepalese, to name their sons.\n"}
{"id": "17340361", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17340361", "title": "Bichon au citron", "text": "Bichon au citron\n\nThe bichon au citron is a French pastry. It is similar to a turnover in size, shape, and that it is made of puff pastry. A major distinguishing feature is that it is filled with lemon curd. The outer layer of sugar is sometimes partially caramelized. \n\n"}
{"id": "17345999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17345999", "title": "Organic food", "text": "Organic food\n\nOrganic food is food produced by methods that comply with the standards of organic farming. Standards vary worldwide, but organic farming features practices that cycle resources, promote ecological balance, and conserve biodiversity. Organizations regulating organic products may restrict the use of certain pesticides and fertilizers in the farming methods used to produce such products. Organic foods typically are not processed using irradiation, industrial solvents, or synthetic food additives.\n\nIn the 21st century, the European Union, the United States, Canada, Mexico, Japan, and many other countries require producers to obtain special certification to market their food as \"organic\". Although the produce of kitchen gardens may actually be organic, selling food with an organic label is regulated by governmental food safety authorities, such as the National Organic Program of the US Department of Agriculture (USDA) or European Commission (EC).\n\nFrom an environmental perspective, fertilizing, overproduction, and the use of pesticides in conventional farming may negatively affect ecosystems, biodiversity, groundwater, and drinking water supplies. These environmental and health issues are intended to be minimized or avoided in organic farming. However, the outcome of farming organically may not produce such benefits because organic agriculture has higher production costs and lower yields, higher labor costs, and higher consumer prices.\n\nDemand for organic foods is primarily driven by consumer concerns for personal health and the environment. From the perspective of science and consumers, there is insufficient evidence in the scientific and medical literature to support claims that organic food is either safer or healthier to eat than conventional food. While there may be some differences in the nutrient and antinutrient contents of organically and conventionally produced food, the variable nature of food production, shipping, storage, and handling makes it difficult to generalize results. Claims that \"organic food tastes better\" are generally not supported by tests.\n\nFor the vast majority of its history, agriculture can be described as having been organic; only during the 20th century was a large supply of new products, generally deemed not organic, introduced into food production. The organic farming movement arose in the 1940s in response to the industrialization of agriculture.\n\nIn 1939, Lord Northbourne coined the term \"organic farming\" in his book \"Look to the Land\" (1940), out of his conception of \"the farm as organism,\" to describe a holistic, ecologically balanced approach to farming—in contrast to what he called \"chemical farming,\" which relied on \"imported fertility\" and \"cannot be self-sufficient nor an organic whole.\" Early soil scientists also described the differences in soil composition when animal manures were used as \"organic\", because they contain carbon compounds where superphosphates and haber process nitrogen do not. Their respective use affects humus content of soil. This is different from the scientific use of the term \"organic\" in chemistry, which refers to a class of molecules that contain carbon, especially those involved in the chemistry of life. This class of molecules includes everything likely to be considered edible, and include most pesticides and toxins too, therefore the term \"organic\" and, especially, the term \"inorganic\" (sometimes wrongly used as a contrast by the popular press) as they apply to organic chemistry is an equivocation fallacy when applied to farming, the production of food, and to foodstuffs themselves. Properly used in this agricultural science context, \"organic\" refers to the methods grown and processed, not necessarily the chemical composition of the food.\n\nIdeas that organic food could be healthier and better for the environment originated in the early days of the organic movement as a result of publications like the 1943 book The Living Soil and \"Farming and Gardening for Health or Disease\" (1945).\n\nIn the industrial era, organic gardening reached a modest level of popularity in the United States in the 1950s. In the 1960s, environmentalists and the counterculture championed organic food, but it was only in the 1970s that a national marketplace for organic foods developed.\n\nEarly consumers interested in organic food would look for non-chemically treated, non-use of unapproved pesticides, fresh or minimally processed food. They mostly had to buy directly from growers. Later, \"Know your farmer, know your food\" became the motto of a new initiative instituted by the USDA in September 2009. Personal definitions of what constituted \"organic\" were developed through firsthand experience: by talking to farmers, seeing farm conditions, and farming activities. Small farms grew vegetables (and raised livestock) using organic farming practices, with or without certification, and the individual consumer monitored. Small specialty health food stores and co-operatives were instrumental to bringing organic food to a wider audience. As demand for organic foods continued to increase, high volume sales through mass outlets such as supermarkets rapidly replaced the direct farmer connection. Today, many large corporate farms have an organic division. However, for supermarket consumers, food production is not easily observable, and product labeling, like \"certified organic,\" is relied upon. Government regulations and third-party inspectors are looked to for assurance.\n\nIn the 1970s, interest in organic food grew with the rise of the environmental movement, and was also spurred by food-related health scares like the concerns about Alar that arose in the mid-1980s.\n\nOrganic food production is a self-regulated industry with government oversight in some countries, distinct from private gardening. Currently, the European Union, the United States, Canada, Japan, and many other countries require producers to obtain special certification based on government-defined standards in order to market food as organic within their borders. In the context of these regulations, foods marketed as organic are produced in a way that complies with organic standards set by national governments and international organic industry trade organizations.\n\nIn the United States, organic production is managed in accordance with the Organic Foods Production Act of 1990 (OFPA) and regulations in Title 7, Part 205 of the Code of Federal Regulations to respond to site-specific conditions by integrating cultural, biological, and mechanical practices that foster cycling of resources, promote ecological balance, and conserve biodiversity. If livestock are involved, the livestock must be reared with regular access to pasture and without the routine use of antibiotics or growth hormones.\n\nProcessed organic food usually contains only organic ingredients. If non-organic ingredients are present, at least a certain percentage of the food's total plant and animal ingredients must be organic (95% in the United States, Canada, and Australia). Foods claiming to be organic must be free of artificial food additives, and are often processed with fewer artificial methods, materials and conditions, such as chemical ripening, food irradiation, and genetically modified ingredients. Pesticides are allowed as long as they are not synthetic. However, under US federal organic standards, if pests and weeds are not controllable through management practices, nor via organic pesticides and herbicides, \"a substance included on the National List of synthetic substances allowed for use in organic crop production may be applied to prevent, suppress, or control pests, weeds, or diseases.\" Several groups have called for organic standards to prohibit nanotechnology on the basis of the precautionary principle in light of unknown risks of nanotechnology. The use of nanotechnology-based products in the production of organic food is prohibited in some jurisdictions (Canada, the UK, and Australia) and is unregulated in others.\n\nTo be certified organic, products must be grown and manufactured in a manner that adheres to standards set by the country they are sold in:\n\nIn the United States, there are four different levels or categories for organic labeling. 1)‘100%’ Organic: This means that all ingredients are produced organically. It also may have the USDA seal. 2)‘Organic’: At least 95% or more of the ingredients are organic. 3)’Made With Organic Ingredients': Contains at least 70% organic ingredients. 4)‘Less Than 70% Organic Ingredients’: Three of the organic ingredients must be listed under the ingredient section of the label. In the U.S., the food label \"natural\" or \"all natural\" does not mean that the food was produced and processed organically.\"\n\nThere is widespread public belief that organic food is safer, more nutritious, and better tasting than conventional food, which has largely contributed to the development of an organic food culture. Consumers purchase organic foods for different reasons, including concerns about the effects of conventional farming practices on the environment, human health, and animal welfare.\n\nThe most important reason for purchasing organic foods seems to be beliefs about the products' health-giving properties and higher nutritional value. These beliefs are promoted by the organic food industry, and have fueled increased demand for organic food despite higher prices and difficulty in confirming these claimed benefits scientifically. Organic labels also stimulate the consumer to view the product as having more positive nutritional value.\n\nPsychological effects such as the “halo” effect, which are related to the choice and consumption of organic food, are also important motivating factors in the purchase of organic food. The perception that organic food is low-calorie food or health food appears to be common.\n\nIn China the increasing demand for organic products of all kinds, and in particular milk, baby food and infant formula, has been \"spurred by a series of food scares, the worst being the death of six children who had consumed baby formula laced with melamine\" in 2009 and the 2008 Chinese milk scandal, making the Chinese market for organic milk the largest in the world as of 2014. A Pew Research Centre survey in 2012 indicated that 41% of Chinese consumers thought of food safety as a very big problem, up by three times from 12% in 2008.\n\nThere is no good evidence that organic food tastes better than its non-organic counterparts. There is evidence that some organic fruit is drier than conventionally grown fruit; a slightly drier fruit may also have a more intense flavor due to the higher concentration of flavoring substances.\n\nSome foods, such as bananas, are picked when unripe, are cooled to prevent ripening while they are shipped to market, and then are induced to ripen quickly by exposing them to propylene or ethylene, chemicals produced by plants to induce their own ripening; as flavor and texture changes during ripening, this process may affect those qualities of the treated fruit.\n\nWith respect to chemical differences in the composition of organically grown food compared with conventionally grown food, studies have examined differences in nutrients, antinutrients, and pesticide residues. These studies generally suffer from confounding variables, and are difficult to generalize due to differences in the tests that were done, the methods of testing, and because the vagaries of agriculture affect the chemical composition of food; these variables include variations in weather (season to season as well as place to place); crop treatments (fertilizer, pesticide, etc.); soil composition; the cultivar used, and in the case of meat and dairy products, the parallel variables in animal production. Treatment of the foodstuffs after initial gathering (whether milk is pasteurized or raw), the length of time between harvest and analysis, as well as conditions of transport and storage, also affect the chemical composition of a given item of food. Additionally, there is evidence that organic produce is drier than conventionally grown produce; a higher content in any chemical category may be explained by higher concentration rather than in absolute amounts.\n\nMany people believe that organic foods have higher content of nutrients and thus are healthier than conventionally produced foods. However, scientists have not been equally convinced that this is the case as the research conducted in the field has not shown consistent results.\n\nA 2009 systematic review found that organically produced foodstuffs are not richer in vitamins and minerals than conventionally produced foodstuffs. The results of the systematic review only showed a lower nitrogen and higher phosphorus content in organic produced compared to conventionally grown foodstuffs. Content of vitamin C, calcium, potassium, total soluble solids, copper, iron, nitrates, manganese, and sodium did not differ between the two categories.\n\nA 2012 survey of the scientific literature did not find significant differences in the vitamin content of organic and conventional plant or animal products, and found that results varied from study to study. Produce studies reported on ascorbic acid (vitamin C) (31 studies), beta-carotene (a precursor for vitamin A) (12 studies), and alpha-tocopherol (a form of vitamin E) (5 studies) content; milk studies reported on beta-carotene (4 studies) and alpha-tocopherol levels (4 studies). Few studies examined vitamin content in meats, but these found no difference in beta-carotene in beef, alpha-tocopherol in pork or beef, or vitamin A (retinol) in beef. The authors analyzed 11 other nutrients reported in studies of produce. A 2011 literature review found that organic foods had a higher micronutrient content overall than conventionally produced foods.\n\nSimilarly, organic chicken contained higher levels of omega-3 fatty acids than conventional chicken. The authors found no difference in the protein or fat content of organic and conventional raw milk.\n\nA 2016 systematic review and meta-analysis found that organic meat had comparable or slightly lower levels of saturated fat and monounsaturated fat as conventional meat, but higher levels of both overall and n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids. Another meta-analysis published the same year found no significant differences in levels of saturated and monounsaturated fat between organic and conventional milk, but significantly higher levels of overall and n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids in organic milk than in conventional milk.\n\nThe amount of nitrogen content in certain vegetables, especially green leafy vegetables and tubers, has been found to be lower when grown organically as compared to conventionally. When evaluating environmental toxins such as heavy metals, the USDA has noted that organically raised chicken may have lower arsenic levels. Early literature reviews found no significant evidence that levels of arsenic, cadmium or other heavy metals differed significantly between organic and conventional food products. However, a 2014 review found lower concentrations of cadmium, particularly in organically grown grains.\n\nA 2014 meta-analysis of 343 studies on phytochemical composition found that organically grown crops had lower cadmium and pesticide residues, and 17% higher concentrations of polyphenols than conventionally grown crops. Concentrations of phenolic acids, flavanones, stilbenes, flavones, flavonols, and anthocyanins were elevated, with flavanones being 69% higher. Studies on phytochemical composition of organic crops have numerous deficiencies, including absence of standardized measurements and poor reporting on measures of variability, duplicate or selective reporting of data, publication bias, lack of rigor in studies comparing pesticide residue levels in organic and conventional crops, the geographical origin of samples, and inconsistency of farming and post-harvest methods.\n\nThe amount of pesticides that remain in or on food is called pesticide residue. In the United States, before a pesticide can be used on a food crop, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency must determine whether that pesticide can be used without posing a risk to human health.\n\nA 2012 meta-analysis determined that detectable pesticide residues were found in 7% of organic produce samples and 38% of conventional produce samples. This result was statistically heterogeneous, potentially because of the variable level of detection used among these studies. Only three studies reported the prevalence of contamination exceeding maximum allowed limits; all were from the European Union. A 2014 meta-analysis found that conventionally grown produce was four times more likely to have pesticide residue than organically grown crops.\n\nThe American Cancer Society has stated that no evidence exists that the small amount of pesticide residue found on conventional foods will increase the risk of cancer, although it recommends thoroughly washing fruits and vegetables. They have also stated that there is no research to show that organic food reduces cancer risk compared to foods grown with conventional farming methods.\n\nThe Environmental Protection Agency maintains strict guidelines on the regulation of pesticides by setting a tolerance on the amount of pesticide residue allowed to be in or on any particular food.\nAlthough some residue may remain at the time of harvest, residue tend to decline as the pesticide breaks down over time. In addition, as the commodities are washed and processed prior to sale, the residues often diminish further.\n\nA 2012 meta-analysis determined that prevalence of \"E. coli\" contamination was not statistically significant (7% in organic produce and 6% in conventional produce). While bacterial contamination is common among both organic and conventional animal products, differences in the prevalence of bacterial contamination between organic and conventional animal products were also statistically insignificant.\n\nOrganic meat certification in the United States requires farm animals to be raised according to USDA organic regulations throughout their lives. These regulations require that livestock are fed certified organic food that contains no animal byproducts. Further, organic farm animals can receive no growth hormones or antibiotics, and they must be raised using techniques that protect native species and other natural resources. Irradiation and genetic engineering are not allowed with organic animal production. One of the major differences in organic animal husbandry protocol is the \"pasture rule\": minimum requirements for time on pasture do vary somewhat by species and between the certifying agencies, but the common theme is to require as much time on pasture as possible and reasonable.\n\nThere is little scientific evidence of benefit or harm to human health from a diet high in organic food, and conducting any sort of rigorous experiment on the subject is very difficult. A 2012 meta-analysis noted that \"there have been no long-term studies of health outcomes of populations consuming predominantly organic versus conventionally produced food controlling for socioeconomic factors; such studies would be expensive to conduct.\" A 2009 meta-analysis noted that \"most of the included articles did not study direct human health outcomes. In ten of the included studies (83%), a primary outcome was the change in antioxidant activity. Antioxidant status and activity are useful biomarkers but do not directly equate to a health outcome. Of the remaining two articles, one recorded proxy-reported measures of atopic manifestations as its primary health outcome, whereas the other article examined the fatty acid composition of breast milk and implied possible health benefits for infants from the consumption of different amounts of conjugated linoleic acids from breast milk.\" In addition, as discussed above, difficulties in accurately and meaningfully measuring chemical differences between organic and conventional food make it difficult to extrapolate health recommendations based solely on chemical analysis.\n\nAs of 2012, the scientific consensus is that while \"consumers may choose to buy organic fruit, vegetables and meat because they believe them to be more nutritious than other food... the balance of current scientific evidence does not support this view.\" The evidence of beneficial health effects of organic food consumption is scarce, which has led researchers to call for more long-term studies. In addition, studies that suggest that organic foods may be healthier than conventional foods face significant methodological challenges, such as the correlation between organic food consumption and factors known to promote a healthy lifestyle. When the American Academy of Pediatrics reviewed the literature on organic foods in 2012, they found that \"current evidence does not support any meaningful nutritional benefits or deficits from eating organic compared with conventionally grown foods, and there are no well-powered human studies that directly demonstrate health benefits or disease protection as a result of consuming an organic diet.\"\n\nThe main difference between organic and conventional food products are the chemicals involved during production and processing. The residues of those chemicals in food products have dubious effects on human health. All food products on the market including those that contain residues of pesticides, antibiotics, growth hormones and other types of chemicals that are used during production and processing are said to be safe.\n\nClaims of improved safety of organic food has largely focused on pesticide residues. These concerns are driven by the facts that \"(1) acute, massive exposure to pesticides can cause significant adverse health effects;\n(2) food products have occasionally been contaminated with pesticides, which can result in acute toxicity; and (3) most, if not all, commercially purchased food contains trace amounts of agricultural pesticides.\" However, as is frequently noted in the scientific literature: \"What does not follow from this, however, is that chronic exposure to the trace amounts of pesticides found in food results in demonstrable toxicity. This possibility is practically impossible to study and quantify;\" therefore firm conclusions about the relative safety of organic foods have been hampered by the difficulty in proper study design and relatively small number of studies directly comparing organic food to conventional food.\n\nAdditionally, the Carcinogenic Potency Project, which is a part of the US EPA's Distributed Structure-Searchable Toxicity (DSSTox) Database Network, has been systemically testing the carcinogenicity of chemicals, both natural and synthetic, and building a publicly available database of the results for the past ~30 years. Their work attempts to fill in the gaps in our scientific knowledge of the carcinogenicity of all chemicals, both natural and synthetic, as the scientists conducting the Project described in the journal, \"Science\", in 1992: Toxicological examination of synthetic chemicals, without similar examination of chemicals that occur naturally, has resulted in an imbalance in both the data on and the perception of chemical carcinogens. Three points that we have discussed indicate that comparisons should be made with natural as well as synthetic chemicals.<br>\n1) The vast proportion of chemicals that humans are exposed to occur naturally. Nevertheless, the public tends to view chemicals as only synthetic and to think of synthetic chemicals as toxic despite the fact that every natural chemical is also toxic at some dose. The daily average exposure of Americans to burnt material in the diet is ~2000 mg, and exposure to natural pesticides (the chemicals that plants produce to defend themselves) is ~1500 mg. In comparison, the total daily exposure to all synthetic pesticide residues combined is ~0.09 mg. Thus, we estimate that 99.99% of the pesticides humans ingest are natural. Despite this enormously greater exposure to natural chemicals, 79% (378 out of 479) of the chemicals tested for carcinogenicity in both rats and mice are synthetic (that is, do not occur naturally). <br>\n2) It has often been wrongly assumed that humans have evolved defenses against the natural chemicals in our diet but not against the synthetic chemicals. However, defenses that animals have evolved are mostly general rather than specific for particular chemicals; moreover, defenses are generally inducible and therefore protect well from low doses of both synthetic and natural chemicals.<br>\n3) Because the toxicology of natural and synthetic chemicals is similar, one expects (and finds) a similar positivity rate for carcinogenicity among synthetic and natural chemicals. The positivity rate among chemicals tested in rats and mice is ~50%. Therefore, because humans are exposed to so many more natural than synthetic chemicals (by weight and by number), humans are exposed to an enormous background of rodent carcinogens, as defined by high-dose tests on rodents. We have shown that even though only a tiny proportion of natural pesticides in plant foods have been tested, the 29 that are rodent carcinogens among the 57 tested, occur in more than 50 common plant foods. It is probable that almost every fruit and vegetable in the supermarket contains natural pesticides that are rodent carcinogens.\n\nWhile studies have shown via chemical analysis, as discussed above, that organically grown fruits and vegetables have significantly lower pesticide residue levels, the significance of this finding on actual health risk reduction is debatable as both conventional foods and organic foods generally have pesticide levels well below government established guidelines for what is considered safe. This view has been echoed by the U.S. Department of Agriculture and the UK Food Standards Agency.\n\nA study published by the National Research Council in 1993 determined that for infants and children, the major source of exposure to pesticides is through diet. A study published in 2006 by Lu et al. measured the levels of organophosphorus pesticide exposure in 23 school children before and after replacing their diet with organic food. In this study it was found that levels of organophosphorus pesticide exposure dropped from negligible levels to undetectable levels when the children switched to an organic diet, the authors presented this reduction as a significant reduction in risk. The conclusions presented in Lu et al. were criticized in the literature as a case of bad scientific communication.\n\nMore specifically, claims related to pesticide residue of increased risk of infertility or lower sperm counts have not been supported by the evidence in the medical literature. Likewise the American Cancer Society (ACS) has stated their official position that \"whether organic foods carry a lower risk of cancer because they are less likely to be contaminated by compounds that might cause cancer is largely unknown.\" Reviews have noted that the risks from microbiological sources or natural toxins are likely to be much more significant than short term or chronic risks from pesticide residues.\n\nIn looking at possible increased risk to safety from organic food consumption, reviews have found that although there may be increased risk from microbiological contamination due to increased manure use as fertilizer from organisms like during organic produce production, there is little evidence of actual incidence of outbreaks which can be positively blamed on organic food production. The was blamed on organic farming of bean sprouts.\n\nFrom an environmental perspective, fertilizing, overproduction and the use of pesticides in conventional farming has caused, and is causing, enormous damage worldwide to local ecosystems, biodiversity, groundwater and drinking water supplies, and sometimes farmer's health and fertility. Outcomes from organic farming, however, are uncertain for their environmental benefits, and have limits for transforming the food system, where reducing food waste and dietary changes might provide greater benefits.\n\nOrganic agriculture has higher potential costs due to lower yields, higher labor costs, and higher consumer prices. Demand for organic foods is primarily driven by concerns for personal health and for the environment. Global sales for organic foods climbed by more than 170 percent since 2002 reaching more than $63 billion in 2011 while certified organic farmland remained relatively small at less than 2 percent of total farmland under production, increasing in OECD and EU countries (which account for the majority of organic production) by 35 percent for the same time period. Organic products typically cost 10 to 40% more than similar conventionally produced products, to several times the price. Processed organic foods vary in price when compared to their conventional counterparts.\n\nWhile organic food accounts for about 1% of total food production worldwide, the organic food sales market is growing rapidly with between 5 and 10 percent of the food market share in the United States according to the Organic Trade Association, significantly outpacing sales growth volume in dollars of conventional food products. World organic food sales jumped from US $23 billion in 2002 to $63 billion in 2011.\n\nProduction and consumption of organic products is rising rapidly in Asia, and both China and India are becoming global producers of organic crops and a number of countries, particularly China and Japan, also becoming large consumers of organic food and drink. The disparity between production and demand, is leading to a two-tier organic food industry, typified by significant and growing imports of primary organic products such as dairy and beef from Australia, Europe, New Zealand and the United States.\n\n"}
{"id": "17348237", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17348237", "title": "Champagne breakfast", "text": "Champagne breakfast\n\nA champagne breakfast is a breakfast served with champagne or sparkling wine. It is a new concept in some countries and is not typical of the role of a breakfast.\n\nIt may be part of any day or outing considered particularly luxurious or indulgent. The accompanying breakfast is sometimes of a similarly high standard and include rich foods such as salmon, caviar, chocolate or pastries, which would not ordinarily be eaten at breakfast or more courses. \nInstead of as a formal meal the breakfast can be given to the recipient in a basket or hamper.\n\nAs part of a day where scheduled activities have been arranged, the breakfast may be served early in the day, or even at sunrise. The breakfast may be as part of a cruise or tour.\nIt can be a part of honeymooning couple's itinerary, or stay at a hotel, when it may be delivered to the couple in bed. This can also be a part of Valentine's day or a Valentine's Day holiday package.\n\nThe breakfast can be delivered or served to someone as part of any treat acknowledging the person's worth, such as Mother's day.\nor as a celebration of an event or achievement. A champagne breakfast was even fed to Red Marauder when the horse won the Grand National.\nIt may be a tradition at some colleges for graduation, such as Wells College and Bryn Mawr College. People may be awarded a Champagne breakfast as part of winning a competition.\n\nThe breakfast may be hosted as a means of attracting people for the launch of a business, or a charity fundraiser.\n\n"}
{"id": "17352091", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17352091", "title": "Mousefood", "text": "Mousefood\n\nMousefood or Anlleq is a native food highly prized by Yupik people on the Yukon-Kuskokwim Delta. It consists of the roots of various tundra plants which are cached by voles in underground burrows. Raindrops are the roots of tall cottongrass. These roots are less than an inch long and are shaped, as the name suggests, like a drop of water. They are eaten with seal oil or put in soup. Eskimo sweet potatoes are the roots of \"Hedysarum alpinum\". As the name suggests, these roots are somewhat sweet and are used in Akutaq. Elders teach that when collecting mousefood, one should always leave half of the cache for the \"mouse.\" They also recommend leaving a gift – something that the mouse can eat – for the mouse.\n"}
{"id": "17356554", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17356554", "title": "Lucy Appleby", "text": "Lucy Appleby\n\nFlorence Lucy Appleby MBE (née Walley; 1 February 192024 April 2008) was an English traditional cheesemaker. She created 'Mrs Appleby's Cheshire' which by the time of her death was the last remaining Cheshire cheese to observe the traditions of using unpasteurised milk from the farm herd, being bound in calico cloth and matured on-farm. Lucy went on to co-found the Specialist Cheesemakers Association to defend the use of unpasteurised milk in cheesemaking.\n\nOne of eight children, Lucy Appleby was born Florence Lucy Walley on 1 February 1920 to a farming and cheesemaking family at Lighteach Farm, Whitchurch, Shropshire. She attended Whitchurch High School. \n\nShe learnt cheesemaking from her grandmother and mother and went on to study it at Cheshire School of Agriculture (now Reaseheath College ) under the direction of a Miss Bennion, Chief Dairy Instructress and proponent of traditional cheesemaking techniques. \n\nThe Applebys' cheese company was founded in 1952. The stables at Hawkstone Abbey Farm were converted into a dairy where Appleby made cloth-bound Cheshire cheese to a traditional recipe using unpasteurised milk from their herd of Friesian cattle. \n\nAppleby's ambition was to revive a cheese that had been made on 2000 farms as recently as 1914 but whose production had declined to less than 50 producers by the time Lucy started the Appleby's cheese company. In 2017, the Appleby family was the only remaining regular producer of unpasteurised milk farmhouse Cheshire.\n\nLucy Appleby took a number of decisions as a cheesemaker that went against the emerging trends and pressures of her time but which preserved the authenticity and quality of Appleby's Cheshire.\n\nAt the time that Appleby began making cheese at Hawkstone Abbbey Farm cheesemakers were experimenting with binding cheeses in wax, rather than the traditional calico cloth to reduce moisture loss and thus increase yield. Appleby rejected this method because she believed that calico allowed the cheese to breathe and better flavours to develop as a result. In later years she encouraged fellow cheesemakers who had adopted wax binding to revert to calico.\n\nAs was customary at the time, the Appleby's cheese was initially sold through the Milk Marketing Board (MMB). But over time the MMB became less aligned with the Applebys' relatively small scale, artisan approach and in 1982 they broke ties with the organisation. This meant their cheese could be marketed for the first time under the family name. As a result the Applebys needed to find new markets for their cheese and so they drove, with a typical 20kg wheel of cheese, to London to introduce leading artisan cheese sellers to Mrs Appleby's Cheshire. This direct approach was a success and within five years the Appleby's were selling 1.5 tonnes a week.\n\nIn the late 1980s a series of public health scares led supermarkets to stop selling cheese made from unpasteurised milk. Whilst many cheesemakers felt compelled to pasteurise their milk in order retain the supermarkets' business, Appleby did not follow suit believing that quality unpasteurised milk was key to the flavour and texture of her cheese. Appleby subsequently co-founded, with Randolph Hodgson, the Specialist Cheesemakers Association, to lobby for the preservation of cheeses made with unpasteurised milk and to encourage excellence in farmhouse cheesemaking.\n\nAfter leaving college she met farmer Lancelot Appleby, whom she married 16 October 1940. She made the Lighteach cheese on her wedding day. They lived for two years near the village of Malpas, Cheshire, before moving to Lance's family farm, Hawkstone Abbey Farm, situated on the edge of the Cheshire Plain in North Shropshire. Over the following decade Lucy and Lance had seven children: Edward, Helen, John, Margaret, Rachel, Robert and Ruth. After raising her children she returned to cheese-making using her own recipe.\n\nLance Appleby died in 2003 and her son, Robert, died in 2002. Lucy Appleby died on 24 April 2008.\n\nIn 2001 Lucy and Lance Appleby were both awarded MBEs for their services to cheesemaking in Shropshire.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "17374228", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17374228", "title": "Tusker (beer)", "text": "Tusker (beer)\n\nTusker is a beer brand owned by East African Breweries, with over 700,000 hectolitres being sold in Kenya per year. It is also the largest African beer brand in the Diageo group. It is a 4.2% ABV pale lager. The beer's slogan \"\"Bia yangu, Nchi yangu\"\" means \"My beer, My country\" in Kiswahili.\n\nIn 1922, Kenya Breweries (now East African Breweries) was formally incorporated as a private limited company. The company's first beer was brewed on 15 December 1922. The first batch was delivered to the Stanley Hotel, where it was met with mixed reactions. The beer, originally from Kenya, shifted through to Tanzania and other countries in the African Great Lakes region, and soon began to be exported.\n\nThe company's first annual general meeting was held in 1923. George Hurst, the company's founder, was killed in an elephant hunting accident and in his memory, his brother Charles decided to name the first beer brewed \"Tusker\".\n\nIn 1929, the company's board moved to use malted barley in the beer's production instead of using imported malt extracts, significantly improving its taste and colour and saving the company at least £780 (approx. US$1,240 or €985) per year. In 2012, that is approximately £35,400 (approx. US$56,220 or €44,690), assuming an annual inflation rate of 2% from 2011 onwards.\n\nWooden beer cases were replaced with plastic cases in 1970. In 1987, Central Glass Industries also began producing Tusker bottles for the first time.\n\nIn early 2008, the UK supermarket chain Tesco began selling Tusker, followed soon after by Sainsbury's.\n\n\nThe three varieties of Tusker beer are a Gold award-winning products from the World Quality Selections, organized yearly by Monde Selection. The taste and quality have also received recognition at the prestigious Monde Selection’s International Awards.\n\n"}
{"id": "17387499", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17387499", "title": "Foam cake", "text": "Foam cake\n\nFoam cakes are cakes with very little (if any) fatty material such as butter, oil or shortening. They are leavened primarily by the air that is beaten into the egg whites that they contain. They differ from butter cakes, which contain shortening, and baking powder or baking soda for leavening purposes. Foam cakes are typically airy, light and spongy.\n\nExamples of foam cakes are angel food cake, meringue, genoise and chiffon cake.\n"}
{"id": "17393545", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17393545", "title": "Janchi-guksu", "text": "Janchi-guksu\n\nJanchi-guksu (Korean: 잔치국수) or banquet noodles is a Korean noodle dish consisting of wheat flour noodles in a light broth made from anchovy and sometimes also \"dasima\" (kelp). Beef broth may be substituted for the anchovy broth. It is served with a sauce made from sesame oil, \"ganjang\" and small amounts of chili pepper powder and scallions. Thinly sliced \"jidan\" (지단, fried egg), \"gim\" (laver) and zucchini are added on top of the dish as garnishes.\n\nThe name derives from the Korean word \"janchi\" (잔치, literally \"feast\" or \"banquet\"), because the noodle dish has been eaten for special occasions like wedding feasts, birthday parties, or \"hwangap\" (60th birthday celebration) throughout Korea. The word \"guksu\" means \"noodles\" in Korean, and noodles symbolise longevity - in life, in a marriage.\n\nThere are records of \"guksu\" dating back to the Goryeo period. In the book \"Dongguk Isangguk Jeonjip\" Book 6 (hangul:동국이상국전집 6, hanja:東國李相國全集) there is a mention of \"guksu\" in a line of poetry, and in the book \"Goryeo Dogyeong\" (hangul:고려도경, hanja:高麗圖經) written by an envoy from the Chinese Song Dynasty it is mentioned that \"guksu\" was eaten on special occasions as wheat was rare and expensive in Goryeo. (The most common ingredients for noodles were buckwheat or starch.)\n\nBecause the noodles are traditionally eaten at weddings, the expression \"When are you going to feed us \"guksu\"?\" is a way of asking \"When are you going to get married?\" and a wedding day might be referred as \"a day to eat \"guksu\"\".\n\nFollowing the impeachment of Park Geun-hye, many Koreans ate fried chicken and janchi-guksu, which trended on Korean Twitter.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "17401600", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17401600", "title": "Necessity good", "text": "Necessity good\n\nIn economics, a necessity good or a necessary good is a type of normal good. \nNecessity goods are products and services that consumers will buy regardless of the changes in their income levels, therefore making these products less sensitive to income change. Examples include repetitive purchases of different durations such as haircuts, habits including tobacco, everday essentials such as electricity and water, and critical medicine such as insulin. As for any other normal good, an income rise will lead to a rise in demand, but the increase for a necessity good is less than proportional to the rise in income, so the proportion of expenditure on these goods falls as income rises. If income elasticity of demand is lower than unity, it is a necessity good. This observation for food, known as Engel's law, states that as income rises, the proportion of income spent on food falls, even if absolute expenditure on food rises. This makes the income elasticity of demand for food between zero and one. \n\nSome necessity goods are produced by a public utility. According to Investopedia, stocks of private companies producing necessity goods are known as defensive stocks. Defensive stocks are stocks that provide a constant dividend and stable earnings regardless of the state of the overall stock market.\n\n"}
{"id": "17402595", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17402595", "title": "Instant-boiled mutton", "text": "Instant-boiled mutton\n\nInstant-boiled mutton () is a Chinese hot pot dish.\n\nInstant-boiled mutton, also known as Mongolian Fire Pot or dip-boil mutton, is a Chinese hot pot dish. Traditionally, Chinese people have eaten it inside the home during cold winter weather, but in recent times, instant-boiled mutton has been eaten year-round. It is also eaten in restaurants.\n\nMutton slice often uses different cut from the back (eg. shangnao, sancha, etc.) and rear legs (eg. modang). The tail of the lamb is used to prepare the soup base.\n\nInstant-boiled mutton dates back to the Yuan Dynasty. At one point during a battle, the Khagan of the Mongol Empire, Kublai Khan, had a sudden craving for stewed mutton. However, the enemy's troops were approaching. To satisfy Kublai Khan's desire, a chef quickly cut off a dozen thin mutton slices and put them in boiling water. He removed them as soon as the lamb changed color and put them into a bowl with salt. Kublai Khan finished the mutton quickly and returned to the battle, which he won. At the victory banquet, Kublai Khan requested that the chef make this lamb dish again and named it instant-boiled mutton.\n\nWhen instant-boiled mutton is eaten in China, a hot-pot of boiling water is placed in the middle of the table. Tofu, Chinese cabbage, bean sprouts, and vermicelli are normally included in the hot-pot. Lamb is pre-sliced paper-thin into unbroken pieces and served on the table. Eaters pick up some pre-sliced raw lamb using chopsticks, put it in the boiling hot-pot, and remove it as soon as the lamb changes color. Each person has a small bowl to hold sauce for the cooked lamb; the sauce is normally a mixture of sesame sauce, chili oil, leeks, and more. \n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "17406545", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17406545", "title": "Jjim", "text": "Jjim\n\nJjim (찜; ) is a Korean cuisine term referring to dishes made by steaming or boiling meat, chicken, fish, or shellfish which have been marinated in a sauce or soup. The cooking technique originally referred to dishes cooked in a \"siru\" (시루, earthenware steamer mainly used for making \"tteok\") by steaming. However, the name \"jjim\" has now come to imply a finished dish with a steamed appearance. The cooking method for most \"jjim\" dishes nowadays has changed to boiling the ingredients in broth and reducing the liquid. Pressure cookers are popular for making \"jjim\" as well.\n\nProteins \"galbi\", beef shank or rump, chicken, fish, or shellfish are usually the main ingredients. The ingredients are marinated in a sauce, then put to a boil with a small amount of water. The liquid is then reduced. Various vegetables and other ingredients are added for enhanced flavor.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "17408562", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17408562", "title": "Ajethna", "text": "Ajethna\n\nAjethna or Ajadina is a dry gravyless vegetable curry. Ajadina means dried in the Tulu language. The ajethna is eaten along with plain cooked rice as part of Udupi cuisine. The vegetables generally used in ajethna are cluster beans, french beans, beetroot, snake gourd, bitter gourd, ladies finger, and others.\n\nWash the vegetables. Chop the vegetable into small rectangular pieces. Put coconut oil in a frying or saute pan and add red chilli and mustard seeds to the oil, saute it, add the chopped vegetables and salt to taste. Stir it for a few minutes and remove from heat. Turmeric powder or cumin seeds or garam masala can be added for different taste. The ajethna is generally served with cooked rice or chapati.\n"}
{"id": "17416369", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17416369", "title": "Currant bun", "text": "Currant bun\n\nA currant bun is a European sweet bun that contains currants or raisins.\n\nThe Chelsea bun is a variant. Neither should be confused with a spiced bun, nor with a similar cake called the tea cake. Nor should it be confused with the scone, a form of cake that is also likely to use currants but which is generally smaller, and which is usually eaten with butter or some butter substitute.\n\n\"Currant Bun\" is English rhyming slang for the tabloid newspaper \"The Sun\".\n\nTowards the end of the seventeenth century the Reverend Samuel Wigley founded the Currant Bun Company in Southampton, Hampshire, UK. He imported currants from the island of Zakynthos where he had served as a missionary in his youth. Despite having failed to convert the population to Puritanism he did bring back the prize of the currant which he combined with traditional Hampshire bakery expertise to create the currant bun.\n\nIn 1824 Duncan Higgins adapted the recipe and used the now freely available Zakynthos currants to create the classic Chelsea bun in his bakery on Fulham Road, adjacent to the fashionable Chelsea district of London.\n\nEvery year in February the descendants of Mr Higgins hold a Chelsea Bun festival in which they celebrate their forefather's culinary achievements.\n\n"}
{"id": "17418663", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17418663", "title": "Crocchè", "text": "Crocchè\n\nCrocchè (from the French \"croquettes\") are a dish of Neapolitan and Sicilian origin, made from mashed potato and egg, which is covered in bread crumbs and fried.\n\nCrocchè are typically a Southern Italian street food, ubiquitous at \"friggitorie\" specializing in fried foods, the Italian equivalent of Fish and chip shops.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "17421360", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17421360", "title": "Kadchgall", "text": "Kadchgall\n\nKadchgall is a hard cylindrical cheese that originated from the Pashtuns of Pakistan and Afghanistan.The cheese generally tastes very sweet and is also a little bit salty. For better taste, the cheese is popularly made of sheep milk, although camel milk can also be used, which is then clotted with yogurt. The cheese is normally yellowish and white in colour, and kind of rubbery. \n\n"}
{"id": "17431823", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17431823", "title": "Yamada Nishiki", "text": "Yamada Nishiki\n\nYamada Nishiki (Japanese: 山田錦) is a short grain Japanese rice, famous for its use in high quality sake. It is particularly desired by sake brewers for its ability to absorb water and dissolve easily.\n\nYamada Nishiki is the most commonly grown sake-rice (\"\"). In 1923 Yamada Nishiki was created by crossing Yamadaho and Tankanwataribune. In 1936, the rice was named Yamada Nishiki. This special rice is mainly grown in Hyogo-ken, its original area, but also Okayama-ken and Fukuoka-ken.\n\nThe rice can be classified into five groups, in which only the first three classes may be used for premium sake. The highest class is again divided in two and will cost about 30,000 Yen for sixty kilogram (as of 2008).\nThe highest class is, however, hard to get even for a top-class sake brewer, and depends on the relationship between the brewer and his rice grower.\n\n"}
{"id": "17453757", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17453757", "title": "Custos", "text": "Custos\n\nCustos is the Latin word for guard.\n\n\n\nIn musical notation, the \"Custos\" is a symbol which indicates the pitch of the next note on the next line.\n\nThe nominative and accusative plural form \"custodes\" is well known from the proverbial phrase \"Quis custodiet ipsos custodes?\", \"Who has custody of the custodians?\", meaning \"Who guards the guards?\" or \"Who watches the watchmen?\".\n"}
{"id": "17456975", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17456975", "title": "Blondie (confection)", "text": "Blondie (confection)\n\nA blondie (also known as a blonde brownie) is a rich, sweet dessert bar. It resembles the traditional chocolate brownie, but substitutes vanilla for the cocoa used in brownies, and contains brown sugar. Blondies are made from flour, brown sugar, butter, eggs, baking powder, and vanilla, and may also contain walnuts or pecans. Blondies often contain white or dark chocolate chips, butterscotch chips, or other flavored chips. Vegan versions use non-dairy butter and various substitutes for eggs.\n\nBlondies differ significantly from white chocolate brownies. Unlike the white chocolate brownie or the normal brownie, they contain no chocolate or chocolate flavouring, other than chocolate chips, which may be included. They may also contain coconut, nuts, toffee, or any other chunky candy for added texture. Blondies are not usually frosted; the brown sugar tends to be sweet enough. A variation is the Congo bar, which contains chocolate chips with either walnuts or coconut.\n\nThey are baked in a pan in an oven in a manner similar to that of the baking of traditional brownies, then they are cut into rectangular shapes for serving. Blondies are sometimes served in sundaes, often topped with caramel sauce.\n"}
{"id": "17458201", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17458201", "title": "Tea loaf", "text": "Tea loaf\n\nA tea loaf is an English cake, made with fruit and cinnamon (or other spices), and traditionally served sliced and spread with butter. Although it is now seen as somewhat old-fashioned, tea loaf is still available and remains particularly associated with Yorkshire.\n\nOften in the making of tea loaves, the fruit (usually currants and sultanas) is soaked in cold tea to plump it before mixing it into the batter.\n\nSimilar breads in the British Isles include the Welsh bara brith and the Irish barmbrack.\n\n"}
{"id": "17460014", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17460014", "title": "Maniçoba", "text": "Maniçoba\n\nManiçoba is a festive dish in Brazilian cuisine, especially from the Amazonian region. It is of indigenous origin, and is made with leaves of the Manioc plant that have been finely ground and boiled for a week (at least four days with the intent to remove the hydrogen cyanide that contains). To these boiled leaves (called \"maniva\" in Portuguese), salted pork, dried meat, and smoked ingredients, such as bacon and sausage, are added. The dish is served with rice and cassava meal (called \"farinha\"). The dish is most found in Belém, the capital of the State of Pará. People usually eat \"maniçoba\" during the Círio de Nazaré, the city's largest religious festival that takes place in October.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "17464533", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17464533", "title": "Yukgaejang", "text": "Yukgaejang\n\nYukgaejang () or spicy beef soup is a spicy, soup-like Korean dish made from shredded beef with scallions and other ingredients, which are simmered together for a long time. It is a variety of \"gomguk\", or thick soup, which was formerly served in Korean royal court cuisine. It is believed to be healthful and is popular due to its hot and spicy nature.\n\nIn addition to shredded beef, scallions, and water, the dish generally also includes bean sprouts, \"gosari\" (bracken fern), \"torandae\" (taro stems), sliced onion, \"dangmyeon\" (sweet potato noodles), chili powder, garlic, perilla seeds (also called wild sesame seeds), soy sauce, oil (sesame oil and/or vegetable oil), black pepper, and salt. Chili oil may also be used. \"Yukgaejang\" is generally served with a bowl of rice and kimchi.\n\nThe dish may alternatively be made with chicken rather than beef, in which case it is called \"dak-yukgaejang\" or \"dakgaejang\".\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "17464669", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17464669", "title": "Lesche", "text": "Lesche\n\nLesche (Gr. ) is an Ionic Greek word, signifying \"council\" or \"conversation\", and a \"place for council or conversation\". There is frequent mention of places of public resort, in the Greek cities, by the name of \"leschai\" (, the Greek plural of \"lesche\"), some set apart for the purpose, and others so called because they were so used by loungers; to the latter class belong the agora and its porticoes, the gymnasia, and the shops of various tradesmen, especially those of the smiths, which were frequented in winter on account of their warmth, and in which, for the same reason, the poor sought shelter for the night. \n\nIn these passages, however, in which are the earliest examples of the use of the word, it seems to refer to places distinct from the smiths' workshops, though resorted to in the same manner; and we may gather from the grammarians, that there were in the Greek cities numerous small buildings or porticoes, furnished with seats, and exposed to the sun, to which the idle resorted to enjoy conversation, and the poor to obtain warmth and shelter, and which were called \"leschai\": at Athens alone there were 360 such. The Suda, referring to a passage in Hesiod, explains \"lesche\" () by means of the word \"kaminos\" (, \"oven\" or \"furnace\").\n\nBy Aeschylus and Sophocles the word is used for a solemn council; but elsewhere the same writers, as well as Herodotus, employ it to signify common conversation.\n\nIn the Dorians states the word retained the meaning of a place of meeting for deliberation and intercourse, a council-chamber or club-room. At Sparta every phyle had its \"lesche\", in which and in the gymnasium the elders passed the greater part of the day in serious and sportive conversation, and in which the newborn children were presented for the decision of the elders as to whether they should be brought up or destroyed. Some of these Spartan \"leschae\" seem to have been halls of some architectural pretensions: Pausanias mentions two of them, the \"lesche krotanon\" () and the \"lesche poikile\" (). They were also used for other purposes.\n\nThere were generally chambers for council and conversation, called by this name, attached to the temples of Apollo, one of whose epithets was Apollo Leschenorios (). Of such \"leschae\" the chief was the Lesche of the Knidians, which was erected at Delphi by the Cnidians, and which was celebrated throughout Greece, less for its own magnificence, than for the paintings with which it was adorned by Polygnotus.\n"}
{"id": "17466908", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17466908", "title": "Kūčiukai", "text": "Kūčiukai\n\nKūčiukai (also šližikai, prėskutė) is a traditional Lithuanian dish served on Kūčios, the traditional Christmas Eve dinner in Lithuania. They are small, slightly sweet pastries made from leavened dough and poppy seeds. There are variations in sweetness, and though usually served soaked in poppy seed milk, they are also eaten without it. Initialy they were made as small loafs of bread served for the spirits - \"vėlės\".\n"}
{"id": "17471651", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17471651", "title": "Cuisine (magazine)", "text": "Cuisine (magazine)\n\nCuisine is a bi-monthly food and wine magazine published in New Zealand. It began publication in 1986, and has also existed in website form since December 2000.\n\nThe magazine features recipes, restaurant reviews, wine reviews and travel features. Annual promotions include\"Cuisine\" Good Food Awards and the \"Cuisine\" Artisan Awards.\n\n\"Cuisine\" has won multiple awards including best food magazine at the Gourmet Voice World Media Awards, and best food magazine at the Le Cordon Bleu Food Media Awards.\n\n\"Cuisine\" was the first New Zealand magazine devoted to food and wine. It was started by Hamish Allison, then brought by Julie Dalzell in 1986. It was bought by Independent Newspapers Limited (INL) in 2001. INL sold all its publications to Fairfax Media in 2003, and they became part of Fairfax New Zealand. \"Cuisine\" was later bought by Slick & Sassy Media from Fairfax. Kelli Brett is the current editor.\n\nIn 2004 \"Cuisine\" developed a New Zealand restaurant competition. The awards are now sponsored by Vittoria Coffee.\n\n2011 Results\n\n2010 Results\n\n2009 Results\n\n2008 Results\n\n2007 Results\n\n2006 Results\n\n2005 Results\n\nIn September 2008 Cuisine started the Cuisine Artisan Awards.\n\nThe awards are open to small-scale producers of foodstuffs other than Cheese, Wine, Olive Oil, Beer and Coffee. Entrants must have been in business for 12-month so that there is proven commercial success.\n\n2011 Supreme Winner\n2011 Runners-up\n2011 Finalists\nClose favourites\n\n2010 Supreme Winner\n2010 Runners-up\n2010 Finalists\n\n2009 Supreme Winner\n2009 Runner-up\n2009 Finalists\n\nIn 2006, Wither Hills Sauvignon Blanc 2006 was stripped of its five-star rating by \"Cuisine\" after scientific tests by the Institute of Environmental Science and Research revealed that the wine submitted for review was not the same as that available in shops. The magazine's wine critic, Michael Cooper, said he was told that the magazine's publishers, Fairfax Media, would not be making public the reason for the reversal. He then went to \"The New Zealand Herald\" with the story, and his contract, which was to come to an end the following year, was terminated early. \n\n\n"}
{"id": "17471966", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17471966", "title": "Little Derby", "text": "Little Derby\n\nLittle Derby is a Derby-style cheese made outside Derbyshire, similar in flavour and texture to Cheddar, but without the annatto colouring used in Derby cheese. \n\nOne manufacturer of the cheese, Fowlers, is based in Earlswood, Warwickshire, having moved from Derbyshire in 1918. Their Little Derby cheese is made with pasteurised cow's milk, producing a semi-hard cheese with a fat content of about 48%. Annatto is not used, but the rinds of the diameter wheels are washed with red wine to give an orange colour. The cheeses are matured for seven months.\n"}
{"id": "17473390", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17473390", "title": "Jokpyeon", "text": "Jokpyeon\n\nJokpyeon () is a dish prepared by boiling cow's trotters and/or other cuts with high collagen content, such as cow's head, skin, tail and pig's head in water for a long time, so that the stewing liquid sets to form a jelly-like substance when cooled.. The dish largely depends on cow's trotters, which explains its name that consists of \"jok\" (; \"foot\") and \"pyeon\" (; \"\"tteok\"\"). \"Jokpyeon\" is sometimes classified as \"muk\", a Korean jelly category made from grain starch, due to the similar appearance and characteristics.\n\nFinely chunked cow's trotters and/or other cuts with high collagen content, such as cow's head, leather cuts, tail, and pig's head are boiled in water for a long time. The cuts contain large amounts of tendon, which comes with collagen that melts down while boiling or stewing for a long time and solidifies when cooled. Sometimes, beef foreshank or pheasant meat is added to give the dish more texture and enhance the flavor, in which case those meats are taken out after an hour or two, and reserved to be used later. Stewed liquid along with the meat and cartilage but without the bones is poured into a square or rectangular vessel, mixed with the foreshank or pheasant meat, garnished with thin strips of rock tripe, egg garnish and chili threads, and allowed to set in a cold place. Solidified \"jokpyeon\" is sliced and served with a dipping sauce such as \"cho-ganjang\" (soy sauce mixed with vinegar) or \"saeu-jeot\" (salted shrimp).\n\n\n"}
{"id": "17481556", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17481556", "title": "Bal des Ardents", "text": "Bal des Ardents\n\nThe Bal des Ardents (Ball of the Burning Men) or Bal des Sauvages (Ball of the Wild Men) was a masquerade ball held on 28 January 1393 in Paris at which Charles VI of France performed in a dance with five members of the French nobility. Four of the dancers were killed in a fire caused by a torch brought in by a spectator, Charles's brother Louis, Duke of Orléans. Charles and another of the dancers survived. The ball was one of a number of events intended to entertain the young king, who the previous summer had suffered an attack of insanity. The event undermined confidence in Charles's capacity to rule; Parisians considered it proof of courtly decadence and threatened to rebel against the more powerful members of the nobility. The public's outrage forced the King and his brother Orléans, whom a contemporary chronicler accused of attempted regicide and sorcery, to offer penance for the event.\n\nCharles's wife, Isabeau of Bavaria, held the ball to honor the remarriage of a lady-in-waiting. Scholars believe the dance performed at the ball had elements of traditional \"charivari\", with the dancers disguised as wild men, mythical beings often associated with demonology, that were commonly represented in medieval Europe and documented in revels of Tudor England. The event was chronicled by contemporary writers such as the Monk of St Denis and Jean Froissart, and illustrated in a number of 15th-century illuminated manuscripts by painters such as the Master of Anthony of Burgundy. The incident later provided inspiration for Edgar Allan Poe's short story \"Hop-Frog\".\n\nIn 1380, after the death of his father Charles V of France, the 12-year-old Charles VI was crowned king, beginning his minority with his four uncles acting as regents. Within two years one of them, Philip of Burgundy, described by historian Robert Knecht as \"one of the most powerful princes in Europe\", became sole regent to the young king after Louis of Anjou pillaged the royal treasury and departed to campaign in Italy; Charles's other two uncles, John of Berry and Louis of Bourbon, showed little interest in governing. In 1387, the 20-year-old Charles assumed sole control of the monarchy and immediately dismissed his uncles and reinstated the Marmousets, his father's traditional counselors. Unlike his uncles, the Marmousets wanted peace with England, less taxation, and a strong, responsible central government—policies that resulted in a negotiated three-year truce with England, and the Duke of Berry being stripped of his post as governor of Languedoc because of his excessive taxation.\n\nIn 1392 Charles suffered the first in a lifelong series of attacks of insanity, manifested by an \"insatiable fury\" at the attempted assassination of the Constable of France and leader of the Marmousets, Olivier de Clisson—carried out by Pierre de Craon but orchestrated by John IV, Duke of Brittany. Convinced that the attempt on Clisson's life was also an act of violence against himself and the monarchy, Charles quickly planned a retaliatory invasion of Brittany with the approval of the Marmousets, and within months departed Paris with a force of knights.\n\nOn a hot August day outside Le Mans, accompanying his forces on the way to Brittany, without warning Charles drew his weapons and charged his own household knights including his brother Louis I, Duke of Orléans—with whom he had a close relationship—crying \"Forward against the traitors. They wish to deliver me to the enemy.\" He killed four men before his chamberlain grabbed him by the waist and subdued him, after which he fell into a coma that lasted for four days. Few believed he would recover; his uncles, the dukes of Burgundy and Berry, took advantage of the King's illness and quickly seized power, re-established themselves as regents, and dissolved the Marmouset council.\n\nThe comatose king was returned to Le Mans, where Guillaume de Harsigny—a venerated and well-educated 92-year-old physician—was summoned to treat him. After Charles regained consciousness, and his fever subsided, he was returned to Paris by Harsigny, moving slowly from castle to castle, with periods of rest in between. Late in September Charles was well enough to make a pilgrimage of thanks to Notre Dame de Liesse near Laon after which he returned again to Paris.\n\nThe King's sudden onset of insanity was seen by some as a sign of divine anger and punishment and by others as the result of sorcery; modern historians such as Knecht speculate that Charles might have been experiencing the onset of paranoid schizophrenia. Charles continued to be mentally fragile, believing he was made of glass, and according to historian Desmond Seward, running \"howling like a wolf down the corridors of the royal palaces\". Contemporary chronicler Jean Froissart wrote that the King's illness was so severe that he was \"far out of the way; no medicine could help him\". During the worst of his illness Charles was unable to recognize his wife, Isabeau of Bavaria, demanding her removal when she entered his chamber, but after his recovery Charles made arrangements for her to hold guardianship of their children. Isabeau eventually became guardian to her son, the future Charles VII of France (b. 1403), granting her great political power and ensuring a place on the council of regents in the event of a relapse.\n\nIn \"A Distant Mirror: The Calamitous 14th Century\" the historian Barbara Tuchman writes that the physician Harsigny, refusing \"all pleas and offers of riches to remain\", left Paris and ordered the courtiers to shield the King from the duties of government and leadership. He told the King's advisors to \"be careful not to worry or irritate him ... Burden him with work as little as you can; pleasure and forgetfulness will be better for him than anything else.\" To surround Charles with a festive atmosphere and to protect him from the rigor of governing, the court turned to elaborate amusements and extravagant fashions. Isabeau and her sister-in-law Valentina Visconti, Duchess of Orléans, wore jewel-laden dresses and elaborate braided hairstyles coiled into tall shells and covered with wide double hennins that reportedly required doorways to be widened to accommodate them.\n\nThe common people thought the extravagances excessive yet loved their young king, whom they called Charles \"le bien-aimé\" (the well-beloved). Blame for unnecessary excess and expense was directed at the foreign queen, who was brought from Bavaria at the request of Charles's uncles. Neither Isabeau nor her sister-in-law Valentina—daughter of the ruthless Duke of Milan—were well liked by either the court or the people. Froissart wrote in his \"Chronicles\" that Charles's uncles were content to allow the frivolities because \"so long as the Queen and the Duc d'Orléans danced, they were not dangerous or even annoying\".\n\nOn 28 January 1393, Isabeau held a masquerade at the Hôtel Saint-Pol to celebrate the third marriage of her lady-in-waiting, Catherine de Fastaverin. Tuchman explains that a widow's remarriage was traditionally an occasion for mockery and tomfoolery, often celebrated with a \"charivari\" characterized by \"all sorts of licence, disguises, disorders, and loud blaring of discordant music and clanging of cymbals\". On the suggestion of Huguet de Guisay, whom Tuchman describes as well known for his \"outrageous schemes\" and cruelty, six high-ranking knights performed a dance in costume as wood savages. The costumes, which were sewn onto the men, were made of linen soaked with resin to which flax was attached \"so that they appeared shaggy and hairy from head to foot\". Masks made of the same materials covered the dancers' faces and hid their identities from the audience. Some chronicles report that the dancers were bound together by chains. Most of the audience were unaware that Charles was among the dancers. Strict orders forbade the lighting of hall torches and prohibited anyone from entering the hall with a torch during the performance, to minimize the risk of the highly flammable costumes catching fire.\n\nAccording to historian Jan Veenstra the men capered and howled \"like wolves\", spat obscenities and invited the audience to guess their identities while dancing in a \"diabolical\" frenzy. Charles's brother Orléans arrived with Phillipe de Bar, late and drunk, and they entered the hall carrying lit torches. Accounts vary, but Orléans may have held his torch above a dancer's mask to reveal his identity when a spark fell, setting fire to the dancer's leg. In the 17th century, William Prynne wrote of the incident that \"the Duke of Orleance ... put one of the Torches his servants held so neere the flax, that he set one of the Coates on fire, and so each of them set fire on to the other, and so they were all in a bright flame\", whereas a contemporary chronicle stated that he \"threw\" the torch at one of the dancers.\n\nIsabeau, knowing that her husband was one of the dancers, fainted when the men caught fire. Charles, however, was standing at a distance from the other dancers, near his 15-year-old aunt Joan, Duchess of Berry, who swiftly threw her voluminous skirt over him to protect him from the sparks. Sources disagree as to whether the duchess moved into the dance and drew the King aside to speak to him, or whether the King moved away toward the audience. Froissart wrote that \"The King, who proceeded ahead of [the dancers], departed from his companions ... and went to the ladies to show himself to them ... and so passed by the Queen and came near the Duchess of Berry\".\n\nThe scene soon descended into chaos; the dancers shrieked in pain as they burned in their costumes, and the audience, many of them also sustaining burns, screamed as they tried to rescue the burning men. The event was chronicled in uncharacteristic vividness by the Monk of St Denis, who wrote that \"four men were burned alive, their flaming genitals dropping to the floor ... releasing a stream of blood\". Only two dancers survived: the King, thanks to the quick reactions of the Duchess of Berry, and the Sieur de Nantouillet, who jumped into an open vat of wine and remained there until the flames were extinguished. The Count de Joigny died at the scene; Yvain de Foix, son of Gaston Fébus, Count of Foix, and Aimery Poitiers, son of the Count of Valentinois, lingered with painful burns for two days. The instigator of the affair, Huguet de Guisay, survived a day longer, described by Tuchman as bitterly \"cursing and insulting his fellow dancers, the dead and the living, until his last hour\".\n\nThe citizens of Paris, angered by the event and at the danger posed to their monarch, blamed Charles's advisors. A \"great commotion\" swept through the city as the populace threatened to depose Charles's uncles and kill dissolute and depraved courtiers. Greatly concerned at the popular outcry and worried about a repeat of the Maillotin revolt of the previous decade—when Parisians armed with mallets turned against tax collectors—Charles's uncles persuaded the court to do penance at Notre Dame Cathedral, preceded by an apologetic royal progress through the city in which the King rode on horseback with his uncles walking in humility. Orléans, who was blamed for the tragedy, donated funds in atonement for a chapel to be built at the Celestine monastery.\n\nFroissart's chronicle of the event places blame directly on Charles's brother, Orléans. He wrote: \"And thus the feast and marriage celebrations ended with such great sorrow ... [Charles] and [Isabeau] could do nothing to remedy it. We must accept that it was no fault of theirs but of the duke of Orléans.\" Orléans' reputation was severely damaged by the event, compounded by an episode a few years earlier in which he was accused of sorcery after hiring an apostate monk to imbue a ring, dagger and sword with demonic magic. The theologian Jean Petit later testified that Orléans practiced sorcery, and that the fire at the dance represented a failed attempt at regicide made in retaliation for Charles's attack the previous summer.\n\nThe \"Bal des Ardents\" added to the impression of a court steeped in extravagance, with a king in delicate health and unable to rule. Charles's attacks of illness increased in frequency such that by the end of the 1390s his role was merely ceremonial. By the early 15th century he was neglected and often forgotten, a lack of leadership that contributed to the decline and fragmentation of the Valois dynasty. In 1407, Philip the Bold's son, John the Fearless, had his cousin Orléans assassinated because of \"vice, corruption, sorcery, and a long list of public and private villainies\"; at the same time Isabeau was accused of having been the mistress of her husband's brother. Orléans's assassination pushed the country into a civil war between the Burgundians and the Orléanists (known as the Armagnacs), which lasted for several decades. The vacuum created by the lack of central power and the general irresponsibility of the French court resulted in it gaining a reputation for lax morals and decadence that endured for more than 200 years.\n\nVeenstra writes in \"Magic and Divination at the Courts of Burgundy and France\" that the \"Bal des Ardents\" reveals the tension between Christian beliefs and the latent paganism that existed in 14th-century society. According to him, the event \"laid bare a great cultural struggle with the past but also became an ominous foreshadowing of the future.\"\n\nWild men or savages—usually depicted carrying staves or clubs, living beyond the bounds of civilization without shelter or fire, lacking feelings and souls—were then a metaphor for man without God. Common superstition held that long-haired wild men, known as \"lutins\", who danced to firelight either to conjure demons or as part of fertility rituals, lived in mountainous areas such as the Pyrenees. In some village \"charivaris\" at harvest or planting time dancers dressed as wild men, to represent demons, were ceremonially captured and then an effigy of them was symbolically burnt to appease evil spirits. The church, however, considered these rituals pagan and demonic.\n\nVeenstra explains that it was believed that by dressing as wild men, villagers ritualistically \"conjured demons by imitating them\"—although at that period penitentials forbade a belief in wild men or an imitation of them, such as the costumed dance at Isabeau's event. In folkloric rituals the \"burning did not happen literally but in \"effigie\"\", he writes, \"contrary to the \"Bal des Ardents\" where the seasonal fertility rite had watered down to courtly entertainment, but where burning had been promoted to a dreadful reality.\" A 15th-century chronicle describes the \"Bal des Ardents\" as \"una corea procurance demone\" (\"a dance to ward off the devil\").\n\nBecause remarriage was often thought to be a sacrilege—common belief (contrary to the Gospel – Luke 20:27–40 and Matthew 22:29–30) was that the sacrament of marriage extended beyond death—it was censured by the community. Thus the purpose of the Bal des Ardents was twofold: to entertain the court and to humiliate and rebuke Isabeau's lady-in-waiting—in an inherently pagan manner, which the Monk of St Denis seemed to dislike. A ritual burning on the wedding night of a woman who was remarrying had Christian origins as well, according to Veenstra. The Book of Tobit partly concerns a woman who had seven husbands murdered by the demon Asmodeus; she is eventually freed of the demon by the burning of the heart and liver of a fish.\n\nThe event also may have served as a symbolic exorcism of Charles's mental illness at a time when magicians and sorcerers were commonly consulted by members of the court. In the early 15th century, ritual burning of evil, demonic, or Satanic forces was not uncommon as shown by Orléans's later persecution of the King's physician Jehan de Bar, who was burned to death after confessing, under torture, to practicing sorcery.\n\nThe death of four members of the nobility was sufficiently important to ensure that the event was recorded in contemporary chronicles, most notably by Froissart and the Monk of St Denis, and subsequently illustrated in a number of copies of illuminated manuscripts. While the two main chroniclers agree on essential points of the evening—the dancers were dressed as wild men, the King survived, one man fell into a vat, and four of the dancers died—there are discrepancies in the details. Froissart wrote that the dancers were chained together, which is not mentioned in the monk's account. Furthermore, the two chroniclers are at odds regarding the purpose of the dance. According to the historian Susan Crane, the monk describes the event as a wild \"charivari\" with the audience participating in the dance, whereas Froissart's description suggests a theatrical performance without audience participation.\nFroissart wrote about the event in Book IV of his \"Chronicles\" (covering the years 1389 to 1440), an account described by scholar Katerina Nara as full of \"a sense of pessimism\", as Froissart \"did not approve of all he recorded\". Froissart blamed Orléans for the tragedy, and the monk blamed the instigator, de Guisay, whose reputation for treating low-born servants like animals earned him such universal hatred that \"the Nobles rejoiced at his agonizing death\".\n\nThe Monk wrote of the event in the \"Histoire de Charles VI\" (\"History of Charles VI\"), covering about 25 years of the King's reign. He seemed to disapprove on the grounds that the event broke social mores and the King's conduct was unbecoming, whereas Froissart described it as a celebratory event.\n\nScholars are unsure whether either chronicler was present that evening. According to Crane, Froissart wrote of the event about five years later, and the monk about ten. Veenstra speculates that the monk may have been an eyewitness (as he was for much of Charles VI's reign) and that his account is the more accurate of the two. The monk's chronicle is generally accepted as essential for understanding the King's court, however his neutrality may have been affected by his pro-Burgundian and anti-Orléanist stance, causing him to depict the royal couple in a negative manner. A third account was written in the mid-15th century by Jean Juvenal des Ursins in his biography of Charles, \"L'Histoire de Charles VI: roy de France\", not published until 1614.\n\nThe Froissart manuscript dating from between 1470 and 1472 from the Harleian Collection held at the British Library includes a miniature depicting the event, titled \"Dance of the Wodewoses\", attributed to an unknown painter referred to as the Master of the Harley Froissart. A slightly later edition of Froissart's \"Chronicles\", dated to around 1480, contains a miniature of the event, \"Fire at a Masked Dance\", also attributed to an unidentified early Netherlandish painter known as the Master of the Getty Froissart. The 15th-century Gruuthuse manuscript of Froissart's \"Chronicles\", held at the Bibliothèque nationale de France, has a miniature of the event. Another edition of Froissart's \"Chronicles\" published in Paris around 1508 may have been made expressly for Maria of Cleves. The edition has 25 miniatures in the margins; the single full-page illustration is of the \"Bal des Ardents\".\n\n"}
{"id": "17486418", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17486418", "title": "Directorium", "text": "Directorium\n\n\"\"Directorium\"\" is a Latin word denoting a guide. In the later Middle Ages it was specially applied to Catholic liturgical guides for praying the Divine Office and Holy Mass.\n\nFor example, in the early fifteenth century Clement Maydeston, probably following foreign precedents, titled his reorganized \"Sarum Ordinal\" the \"\"Directorium Sacerdotum\"\". In this way the words \"\"Directorium Sacerdotum\"\" came to be included in the beginning of many books, some of them among the earliest products of the printing press in England, that served to instruct clergy as to the form of Divine Office and Mass to be prayed each day of the year.\n\nThe use of \"\"directorium\"\" was not peculiar to England. For example, and not as the earliest one, a very similar work was published at Augsburg in 1501 with the title \"Index sive Directorium Missarum Horarumque secundum ritum chori Constanciensis diocesis dicendarumn\". This title evidences that a \"directorium\", i. e. a guide for praying the Divine Office and Mass, had to be formatted according to the needs of a specific diocese or group of dioceses, because, as a rule, each diocese has certain feasts peculiar to itself, and these must be considered in determining the format of the Divine Office; merely one change often occasioned much disturbance by necessitating the transfer of coincident feasts to other days. From the \"Directorium Sacerdotum\", which in England was often denominated the \"Pye\" and which seems to have come into almost general use about the time of the invention of printing, the later \"Directory\", i. e. the \"Ordo Divini Officii recitandi Sacrique peragendi\" gradually developed.\n\nIt is presently the custom for every Catholic diocese, or, in cases where the calendar followed is substantially identical, for a group of dioceses belonging to the same ecclesiastical province or state, to have a directory, i. e. \"Ordo recitandi\", annually printed for clerical use. It is a calendar for the year in which are printed for each day concise directions for praying the Divine Office and Mass of that day. The calendar usually indicates days of fasting, eligibility for special indulgences, days of devotion, and other information that may be convenient for the clergy to know. The \"Ordo\" is issued with the authority of the bishop or bishops concerned, and is binding on the clergy in their jurisdiction. Religious orders in the diocese usually have their own directories which, in the case of the larger orders, often differ according to the state in which they are present.\n\nFor secular clergy the calendar of the \"Roman Missal\" and \"Roman Breviary\", apart from special privilege, always forms the basis of the \"Ordo recitandi\". To this the feasts celebrated in the diocese are added, and, as the higher grade of these special celebrations often causes them to take precedence of those in the ordinary calendar, a certain amount of shifting and transposition is inevitable, even apart from the complications caused by the movable feasts. All this must be calculated and arranged beforehand in accordance with the rules of the general rubrics of the \"Missal\" and \"Breviary\". Even so, the clergy of particular churches must further provide for the celebration of their own patronal or dedicatory feasts, and to make such other changes in the \"Ordo\" as these insertions may impose. The \"Ordo\" is always in Latin, though an exception is sometimes made in the directories for nuns, and, as it is often supplemented with a few extra pages of diocesan notices, recent decrees of the Congregation of Rites, regulations for praying votive offices, et cetera, these being matters only affecting clergy, the \"Ordo\" is apt to acquire a somewhat technical and exclusive quality.\n\nFor how long a separate and annual \"Ordo recitandi\" has been printed for the use of English clergy seems impossible to determine. Possibly Bishop Challoner, Vicar Apostolic from 1741 to 1781, had something to do with its introduction. But in 1759 a Catholic printer in London conceived the idea of translating the official \"Directorium\", i. e. \"Ordo\", issued for the clergy, and accordingly published in that year \"A Lay Directory or a help to find out and assist at Vespers . . . . on Sundays and Holy Days\". Strange to say, another Catholic printer, seemingly the publisher of the official \"Ordo\", shortly afterwards, conceiving his privileges invaded, produced a rival publication titled \"The Laity's Directory or the Order of the (Catholic) Church Service for the year 1764\". \"The Laity's Directory\" was issued each year for 3 quarters of a century and gradually grew in length. In 1837 \"The Catholic Directory\" supplanted it, which Messrs. Burns and Lambert, later Burns and Oates, has published in London since 1855. The earliest numbers of \"The Laity's Directory\" contained nothing save an abbreviated translation of the clerical \"Ordo recitandi\", but toward the end of the eighteenth century a list of the Catholic chapels in London, advertisements of schools, obituary notices, important ecclesiastical announcements, and other miscellaneous matters began to be added, and at a still later date an index of the names and addresses of the Catholic clergy serving the missions in England and Scotland was added. This index was imitated in the \"Irish Catholic Director\" and in \"The Catholic Directory\" of the United States. Hence the idea became widespread that Catholic directories are so denominated because they commonly form an address book for the churches and clergy of a particular state, but an examination of the early numbers of \"The Laity's Directory\" demonstrates that it was only to the calendar with its indications for the Mass and Divine Office that the name originally applied.\n\nIn the Middle Ages, and indeed almost to the invention of printing, the liturgical books were more numerous than at present, presenting content in more volumes. For example, instead of one volume containing the whole Divine Office, as is presently the case for the \"Breviary\", the Office was contained in at least 4 books, namely the \"Psalterium\", \"Hymnarium\", \"Antiphonarium\", and \"Legendarium\" (book of lessons, i. e., readings).\n\nRubrics or ritual directions for the Mass and Divine Office were rarely written in connection with the text to which they belonged (this is not to treat of the services of rarer occurrence such as those in the \"Pontifical\"), but they were probably at first communicated only by oral tradition, and when they began to be recorded they took only such summary form as is seen in the \"Ordines Romani\" of Hittorp and Mabillon. However, \"circa\" the eleventh century there arose a tendency toward greater elaboration and precision in rubrical directions for the services, and at the same time the beginning of a more or less strongly marked division of these directions into two classes arose, which in the case of the Sarum Use were conveniently distinguished as the Customary and the Ordinal. Generally, the former of these rubrical books contained the principles and the latter their application; the former determined those matters that were constant and primarily the duties of persons, the latter dealt with the arrangements that varied from day to day and year to year.\n\nIt is out of the Ordinal, often denominated the \"Ordinarium\" and \"Liber Ordinarius\", that the \"Directorium\" or \"Pye\", and later the \"Ordo recitandi\" evolved. These distinctions are not clear because the process was gradual. But in the English and Continental Ordinals 2 different stages can be distinguished: first, the type of book in common use from the twelfth to fifteenth century, and represented by the \"Sarum Ordinal\" edited by W. H. Frere and the \"Ordinaria of Laon\" edited by Chevalier. In them was much miscellaneous information respecting feasts, the Divine Office and Mass to be prayed thereon according to the changes necessitated by the occurrence of Easter and the shifting of the Sundays, as well as the \"\"Incipits\"\" of the details of the liturgy, e. g. of the lessons to be read and the commemorations to be made. The second stage took the form of an adaptation of the Ordinal for ready use, an adaptation with which, in the case of Sarum, the name of Clement Maydeston is prominent connected. This was the \"Directorium Sacerdotum\" or the complete \"Pye\", titled \"Pica Sarum\" in Latin, abbreviated editions of which were afterwards published in a form which allowed it to be bound up with the respective portions of the \"Breviary\". The idea of this great \"Pye\" was to give all the 35 possible combinations, 5 to each dominical letter, of which the immovable and movable feasts of the ecclesiastical year admitted, assigning a separate calendar to each, more or less corresponding to the later \"Ordo recitandi\". This arrangement was not peculiar to England.\n\nOne of the earliest printed books of the kind was that issued about 1475 for the Diocese of Constance, of which a rubricated copy is in the British Museum. It is a small folio in size, of 112 leaves, and after the ordinary calendar it supplies summary rules, in 35 sections, for composing the special calendar for each year according to the Golden Number and the dominical letter. Then the \"Ordo\" for each of the 35 possible combinations is given in detail. The name most commonly given to these \"Pyes\" in continental Europe was \"Ordinarius\" and more rarely \"Directorium Missae\". For example, the title of such a book printed for the Diocese of Liège in 1492 read: \"In nomine Domini Amen . . . Incipit liber Ordinarius ostendens qualiter legatur et cantetur per totum anni circulum in ecclesia leodiensi tam de tempore quam de festis sanctorum in nocturnis officiis divinis.\" Such books were also provided for the religious orders. An \"Ordinarius Ordinis Praemonstratensis\" exists in manuscript in Jesus College, Cambridge, England, and an early printed one in the British Museum. When printing became universal, the step from these rather copious directories, which served for all possible years, to a shorter guide of the type of the later \"Ordo recitandi\", and intended only for a specific year, was an easy one. Since, however, such publications are useless after their purpose is once served, they are very liable to destruction, and it seems impossible to date the first attempt to produce an \"ordo\" after this later fashion. The fact that at the Council of Trent (Session 23, \"De Reform.\", Chapter 18) it was thought necessary to urge that ecclesiastical students be taught to understand the \"Computus\", by which they could determine the \"Ordo recitandi\" for each year for themselves, seems to imply that such later \"ordos\" were not in familiar use in the middle of the sixteenth century.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "17494539", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17494539", "title": "Styrian sour soup", "text": "Styrian sour soup\n\nStyrian sour soup () is a sour soup that originates from Lower Styria.\n\nStyrian sour soup was a staple at \"koline\", the biggest secular festival, and become a synonymous with late-night parties. It was typically served at nuptials after midnight.\n\nIt is prepared at the feast of \"koline\" (pig slaughter) from the trotters (feet) and parts of pork head and spiced with onions, garlic, marjoram, thyme, parsley, black pepper, salt and apple or wine vinegar. Slice the meat and vegetables for stock into pieces and boil in salted water. together with herbs. Cut the potatoes into pieces and add them to the soup stock after the meat was softened. Mix in the sour cream or sour milk and flour to thicken, and continue to cook until all ingredients are soft. At the end add some vinegar.\n\nThe meat can also be boiled in one piece. Cut it into pieces and add to the soup only when the vegetables and potatoes are done.\n\n"}
{"id": "17496885", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17496885", "title": "Aspen Soda", "text": "Aspen Soda\n\nAspen Soda was an apple-flavored soft drink sold across the United States by PepsiCo from 1978 until 1982. In 1984, PepsiCo came out with a replacement apple soda under its new Slice line.\n\n"}
{"id": "17504802", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17504802", "title": "Keglevich", "text": "Keglevich\n\nKeglevich is an Italian brand of vodka.\n\nKeglevich is a vodka brand of Stock, a liqueur company founded in 1884 by Lionello Stock. Keglevich Classic is distilled entirely from pure grain with the original recipe invented by the Hungarian Count of Croatian origin, Stephan Keglevich. Keglevich vodka is marketed in Europe, Russia, USA, Israel and Japan. Different tastes have been developed, new flavors have been created to the range, which now numbers 12 varieties, plus the original Keglevich Dry. It's loved by barracks dwellers deployed to NAS Sigonella Sicily.\n\nDifferent tastes have been developed :\n\nKeglevich Dry is a Vodka produced with pure grain realized using the traditional method set out in the original recipe of Count Keglevich in 1882.\nKeglevich Dry vodka is absolutely clear and flawlessly transparent to the eye. It is used either for cocktails and long drinks.\n\nKeglevich is also available in a range of fruit-flavoured, vodka-based liqueurs.\nVodka Keglevich with fruit is the result of pure grain vodka and, depending on the variety, fruit or cream.\nAlso Keglevich fruit is used as a mixer and is excellent for the preparation of Cocktails and long drinks.\n\nHere the following 12 varieties:\n\n\nKeglevich Klamour is an aperitif that combines a triple distilled vodka with an infusion of herbs and passion fruit. Also Keglevich Klamour can be mixed in cocktails or be drunk on the rocks.\nIts bittersweet taste results perfect for the aperitif moment well known in the Italian tradition.\n\n"}
{"id": "17509108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17509108", "title": "Red Devil Energy Drink", "text": "Red Devil Energy Drink\n\nRed Devil Energy Drink is a premium energy drink brand that was formulated in Netherlands in 1995.\n\nRed Devil has an aggressive marketing strategy throughout the world. Their slogan is \"The Taste of Energy\" is translated into many languages in numerous countries. Red Devil mainly focuses on sponsoring many forms of racing including World Rally Championship, F1 Powerboat World Championship, drag racing, and various other types of open wheel, touring car, motorcycle, and stock car racing.\n\nRed Devil originally was produced in a 12oz glass bottle and eventually made its way into a 12oz can. The company also produces Red Devil Light and even begun making Red Devil Energy Gum. The company's huge success in Europe is credited with their massive marketing campaign with successful racing teams.\n\nLike its competitor Red Bull, Red Devil is now sold primarily in 250ml slim cans in the UK. The Drink is popularly mixed with vodka in bars and clubs. It's also now available in large cans of 440ml (in certain shops).\n\nIn late 2007, Red Devil formed a strategic partnership with Impulse One and started their expansion into the United States. They formulated a new version of Red Devil specifically for the U.S. market in a 16oz can which is a bit more sweet and has more of a berry-like taste. Along with the original flavor of the drink, they have also released a Red Devil Light, their sugar free U.S. version.\n\nRed Devil Racing currently sponsors HL Motorsports, an ARCA race team.\n\nIn August 2008, Red Devil was released in Australia although at the moment is only available in limited areas.\n\nIn June 2010, Red Devil was released in Norway, in test- and pre-sales at the moment only available at 7-11 and MIX. The major release is estimated to January 2011.\n"}
{"id": "17515487", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17515487", "title": "Flaming volcano", "text": "Flaming volcano\n\nFlaming volcano is a large tropical group cocktail typically made with rum, brandy, pineapple juice, orange juice, and orgeat syrup. Many variations exist, and the cocktail in the 21st century is more about the presentation than an adherence to a set list of ingredients. It is usually a multi-user drink, served to a group in a special ritual vessel known as a volcano bowl, which is a decorative ceramic bowl (typically of about capacity) designed with a rising central hub feature resembling a volcanic cone. The cone includes a \"crater\" reservoir which can be partially filled with rum or another flammable liquor. The crater liquor is carefully ignited when serving, creating a mild volcanic ambiance with its central blue flame.\n\nA flaming volcano is usually served to a group of two or more people with a set of very long straws to facilitate convenient group sipping from a comfortable distance and for safety. It is sometimes called a scorpion bowl.\n\nThe communal flaming volcano drink is said to have been started in Hawaii in the 1950s or 1960s as a cross between flammable one person ice formed \"volcano cockails\" and larger communal bowl cocktails. Jeff Berry in \"Beachbum Berry Remixed\" has Don the Beachcomber as an early example of serving the larger flaming bowl at his location in St. Paul, Minnesota. He also lists a \"Lei Lani Volcano\" variation from the Polyneisan Village Resort (Walt Disney World) from the 1970s. It is typically served only at Tiki bars. It also has strong roots in its precursor, the scorpion bowl.\n\nSome claim that it originated from or was popular in Chile during the times of Augusto Pinochet., but credible sources, especially as to the drink's original Chilean origin, are non-existent.\n\nOne version of flaming volcano is prepared by blending the ingredients with ice. It is sometimes served with dry ice to provide for a fog effect. The base liquor is usually some form of rum, with brandy commonly added, but vodka and even gin appear in some recipes. Other versions might use lime juice, grapefruit juice, maple syrup, guava nectar, or coconut rum.\n\nThe cocktail was also rebranded as \"the mystery drink\" at Tiki Bars such as the The Kahiki and the Mai Kai.\n\nEarly versions of the ceramic bowl were made by \"Orchids of Hawaii\" and \"Bamboo of China\". Newer versions have been designed by artists such as Shag (pictured) and others.\n\nAs noted in the book \"The B-52's Universe\" by Mats Sexton, the band The B-52's formed after its members shared a flaming volcano at a Chinese Restaurant in Athens, Georgia in November of 1976. Due to a lack of funds, the band had decided to share a cocktail rather than order any food.\n\n"}
{"id": "17526723", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17526723", "title": "Cathedral City Cheddar", "text": "Cathedral City Cheddar\n\nCathedral City is a brand of Cheddar cheese manufactured by Dairy Crest. In the annual rankings of all businesses in the United Kingdom in December 2012, compiled by YouGov's BrandIndex, it was rated as tenth most popular brand in the United Kingdom; the most popular food or drink, ranked higher than Starbucks Coffee.\n\nIt is produced from a twenty five year old recipe at Davidstow in Cornwall, which has neither city status nor a cathedral.\nHowever, the brand's original owners, Mendip Foods, were based in the cathedral city of Wells in Somerset. Dairy Crest bought the brand from Mendip Foods Ltd in 1995. In 2007, Dairy Crest announced an integrated marketing campaign designed to drive growth for Cathedral City, which it has called 'The Big Cheese Tease'. \n\nAs of 2009, Cathedral City Cheese is advertised with the slogan \"Mature, yet mellow\". In August 2014, Cathedral City was cited in research published by the \"British Medical Journal\", highlighting the fact that branded cheeses generally had higher salt content than supermarket own brands.\n\n"}
{"id": "17542223", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17542223", "title": "Hwachae", "text": "Hwachae\n\nHwachae () is a general term for traditional Korean punches, made with various fruits or edible flower petals. The fruits and flowers are soaked in honied water or honied magnolia berry juice. In modern South Korea, carbonated drinks and/or fruit juices are also commonly added to \"hwachae\". Hwachae is often garnished with pine nuts before it is served.\n\nIt is said that there are around thirty types of traditional \"hwachae\".\n\n\nFlower petals are coated with mung bean starch and blanched, cooled in ice water, and drained before being put in \"hwachae\". Flower hwachae is usually topped with pine nuts.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "17557156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17557156", "title": "Jatjuk", "text": "Jatjuk\n\nJatjuk () or pine nut porridge is a variety of \"juk\" (porridge) made by boiling finely ground pine nuts and rice flour in water. It is a mild, nutritious, and easily digestibile dish often served to recovering patients and the elderly.\n\nThe porridge is made with white rice and pine nuts, which are separately soaked, ground and sieved. The ground rice is then boiled, with ground pine nuts added a little at a time while simmering. Grinding the ingredients together causes them to separate after boiling. The porridge is seasoned with salt and often garnished with whole or crushed pine nuts.\n\n"}
{"id": "17569240", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17569240", "title": "Rio Grande Glaze Ware", "text": "Rio Grande Glaze Ware\n\nRio Grande Glaze Ware is a late prehistoric and historic pottery tradition of the Puebloan peoples of New Mexico. The tradition involved painting pots with black paint made with lead ore; as the pots were fired the black paint fused and sometimes ran. The tradition lasted from AD 1315 to 1700. Rio Grande Glaze Ware was made or used in a number of villages from the Santa Fe area to the north end of Elephant Butte Reservoir, and from the valley of the Rio Puerco east to the upper Pecos River Valley.\n\nArchaeologists divide Rio Grande Glaze Ware into arbitrary types with much shorter life spans, primarily to help them date sites. Individual potsherds are assigned to types based on a combination of attributes, beginning with vessel rim profiles and proceeding to painted designs or vice versa.\n\nRio Grande Glaze Ware was first made about AD 1315 (based on tree-ring dating at Tijeras Pueblo). It partly displaced an earlier tradition of black-on-white pottery and was inspired by the White Mountain Red Ware tradition (Carlson 1970) centered on the upper Little Colorado drainage of eastern Arizona and western New Mexico. The apparent ancestral type for Rio Grande Glaze Ware, Los Padillas Polychrome, was a local variant on a White Mountain Red Ware type, Heshotauthla Polychrome (Wilson 2005:43). Los Padillas is found at sites dominated by black-on-white decorated pottery (Mera 1935:33), a pattern predating the glazeware tradition, and Wilson (2005:43) dates Los Padillas from AD 1175 to 1300. Habicht-Mauche (1993, Table 2) dates it from AD 1300 to 1350, however. The type is sometimes called Los Padillas Glaze Polychrome.\n\nRio Grande Glaze Ware was fired in an oxygen rich atmosphere. The lead-based pigment yielded a black glazing paint despite the presence of oxygen, while iron-based, non-glazing pigment yielded a matte red paint. Red design elements were most often outlined in black. On most pots, background colors ranged from red to olive to yellow, achieved with clay slips containing iron. A white slip was sometimes achieved by using slip clay imported from the Acoma-Zuni region to the west.\n\nRio Grande Glaze Ware was no longer made after 1700, because the Spanish cut off Pueblo access to the lead ore used in making the glaze paint (Wilson 1995:10). The Pueblos continued to make polychrome pottery but used all matte paints (Harlow 1973), as they do today.\n\nThe ware was made in the Rio Grande Valley and adjacent valleys, from roughly Santa Fe south to the north end of Elephant Butte Reservoir, and from the Rio Puerco east and northeast to the upper Pecos River. Unlike Old World glazed pottery and its derivatives, Rio Grande Glaze Ware used the glaze material as part of a decorative scheme, never to coat and waterproof the entire vessel.\n\nSpielmann (1998) argues that the new pottery was part of changing religious practices\namong the New Mexico Pueblos, and specifically that \"large glaze ware bowls were used ... for\ncommunal feasting, with each household contributing to the feast. The smaller white ware bowls\ncontinued to function as vessels for domestic food consumption. During the fifteenth century,\nwhite ware bowls were replaced by a smaller form of the Rio Grande glaze ware bowl, and thus\nglaze ware bowls came to be used in both ceremonial feasting (large size bowl) and domestic food\nconsumption (small size bowl)\" (Spielmann 1998:258).\n\nArchaeologists divide Rio Grande Glaze Ware into a number of types, primarily to estimate the age of a site (based on what pottery types were found there). In this article the first approach to the named types begins with rim profiles. It is followed by a breakdown that begins with paint styles. Both approaches can be useful in understanding why a specific piece of pottery was assigned to a specific type. What follows is not an exhaustive typology (those can be found in the references provided). Rather, it is just extensive enough to allow non-specialists to understand the existing named distinctions.\n\nThe most time-sensitive attribute of Rio Grande Glaze Ware pottery is the rim profiles of bowls, so most archaeologists sort potsherds beginning with the rims. In doing so they refer to Glaze A through Glaze F pottery, A rims being the earliest and F rims being the latest (Hawley 1950; Wilson 2005). This letter-based key was first developed by Harry Percival Mera (1933), drawing on an earlier, number-based key developed by Anna O. Shepard and Alfred V. Kidder (Kidder and Shepard 1936). Here, the first question is: what rim profile is present?\n\nGlaze A bowl rims are in-curving and of a consistent thickness. The lips are rounded or squared. Glaze A is often dated from AD 1315 to 1425 (Wilson 2005:47), but the end date applies only from the Albuquerque area north. In the southern part of the range, bowls with Glaze A rims were made until AD 1500 or later (Franklin 2007).\n\nGlaze A pottery was first made in the Albuquerque area (the earliest directly dated examples being from Tijeras Pueblo) and was dominated by red-slipped examples with black interior designs. The exteriors are sometimes painted with isolated elements such as crosses. Pottery of this description is classified as Agua Fria Glaze-on-red. In some of the earliest examples, however, simple white paint designs appear on the exterior; such pottery is classified as Arenal Glaze Polychrome (with crushed rock temper) or Los Padillas Polychrome (with sherd temper) (Wilson 2005:47–48).\n\nAs Glaze A pottery spread north, yellow-slipped examples appeared and are known as Cieneguilla Glaze-on-yellow. Yellow-slipped pottery with red matte paint elements outlined in black glaze paint are known as Cieneguilla Glaze Polychrome (Wilson 2005:49–50).\n\nOn some Glaze A pottery, the interior slip color differs from the exterior slip color (so that the background colors are different on each side of a potsherd). If the painted design was executed with black glaze paint, the type is known as San Clemente Glaze Polychrome. If the design also includes red matte paint elements (usually outlined in black), the type is known as Pottery Mound Polychrome (Wilson 2005:51–52).\n\nAlthough most Glaze A rims were quite simple, one contemporary variant has a slightly flaring rim (Honea 1966). Examples with one slip color are classified as Sanchez Glaze-on-red or Sanchez Glaze-on-yellow. Examples with contrasting white (interior) and red (exterior) slips, and with black glaze paint, are termed Sanchez Glaze Polychrome (Wilson 2005:52–54).\n\nGlaze B bowl rims are also incurving but become thicker towards the lips, which are flat. The resulting profile is somewhat wedge-shaped. Glaze B was made almost exclusively in the region north of Albuquerque; farther south, potters simply continued with the Glaze A rim style. Glaze B dates between AD 1400 and 1450 (Wilson 2005:55).\n\nGlaze B vessels with one slip and black glaze paint are classified as Largo Glaze-on-yellow or Largo Glaze-on-red, the yellow-slipped type being more common. Examples with one slip, and red matte paint outlined in black, are classified as Largo Glaze Polychrome. In this type, the lower portions of bowl exteriors are often unslipped (Wilson 2005:55–57).\n\nRarely, examples are found with two contrasting (interior versus exterior) slip colors and black glaze paint designs; these are termed Medio Glaze Polychrome.\n\nGlaze C bowl rims have everted lips. Glaze C was made between AD 1425 and 1500. This rim group has one named type, Espinoso Glaze Polychrome, which includes red matte paint elements outlined in black glaze paint. The contrast between the red paint and the other colors give Espinoso pots a \"gaudy\" look. Jar necks are near-vertical and display red designs outlined in black. The bottom of vessel exteriors may be unslipped. In the Glaze C through E periods, vessel designs were almost exclusively polychrome (Wilson 2005:57).\n\nGlaze D bowl rims date between AD 1470 and 1515. In profile, rim exteriors exhibit an inward bend (or close to it). The rims themselves are either fairly consistent in thickness, or taper slightly to both the body and the lip. This rim group has one named type, San Lazaro Glaze Polychrome, which includes red matte paint elements outlined in black glaze paint. Some examples lack the red matte paint but are also classified as San Lazaro. Bowl interiors and exteriors both have designs in panels or bands. The black paint is thin but non-runny (Wilson 2005:58).\n\nMost Glaze E bowl rims are substantially thicker than the bodies of the bowls, and \"breaks\" (discontinuities) in the exterior curve of the bowl are common. After the Spanish colonized New Mexico in 1598, some glaze ware bowls took on distinctly European shapes, for example, soup plates. Glaze E black paint ran during firing. Glaze E was made from 1515 until 1700 (Wilson 2005:59).\n\nGlaze E bowl rims fall into three named categories. Puaray Glaze Polychrome is characterized by thickened rim profiles reminiscent of willow leaves, above a marked break in the exterior profile. The designs included red matte paint elements outlined runny black (or off-black) glaze. When the rims are instead somewhat rectangular in profile, the type becomes Escondido Glaze Polychrome. In the Pecos Pueblo area, Glaze E rims are sometimes instead somewhat \"stubby,\" meaning that the break is near the rim, and that the thickened portion of the rim is correspondingly short. This variant is known as Pecos Glaze Polychrome (McKenna and Miles 1996; Wilson 2005:59–61).\n\n\"Glaze F ... exhibits a significant decline in the glaze and quality of workmanship\" (Wilson 2005:62). Glaze F bowl rims retain a break in the exterior profile, but the marked thickening of Glaze E disappears. European-inspired shapes become more common. The glaze paint then in use usually fired to runny brown or green rather than black.\n\nGlaze F vessels with one slip and \"black\" glaze paint are classified as Kotyiti Glaze-on-red or Kotyiti Glaze-on-yellow. Several design variants are subsumed by Kotyiti Glaze Polychrome. Some examples of that polychrome type have one slip color and red matte paint elements outlined in \"black\" glaze paint. Others have two slip colors and either \"black\" glaze paint examples or red-and-black paint examples (Wilson 2005:62).\n\nUnder the Mera system of classification, all types based on painting styles fit neatly as subtypes of the types based on rim forms. In practice, specific painting styles do not form neat subsets of groups defined on rim forms, particularly in the southern portion of the production range. Here, the first question is: does the painted design consist of black elements, or of red and black elements?\n\nThe first examples of Rio Grande Glaze Ware carried on a centuries-old tradition of black painted designs on a lighter background. The next question is: was the slipped background (1) red, (2) yellow, or (3) contrasting colors, one on the inside of the vessel, the other on the outside?\n\nArenal Glaze Polychrome and Los Padillas Polychrome feature red-slipped bowls with simple interior designs painted in black glaze paint; the former has crushed rock temper while the latter has crushed sherd temper. The bowl exteriors include simple designs in white matte paint. The overall layout (black-on-red interiors, white-on-red exteriors) is a carryover from White Mountain Red Ware. Arenal dates from AD 1315 to 1350(?) and is found from Albuquerque south—the same area of its supposed ancestor, Los Padillas Polychrome.\n\nAgua Fria Glaze-on-red lacks white paint on bowl exteriors, but is otherwise identical to Arenal. Agua Fria bowls are red-slipped. The black glaze paint is usually dull and non-runny. The black designs are usually laid out in bands on the upper part of bowl interiors. The upper exteriors sometimes have slashes, crosses, or similar isolated motifs. Jars with black-on-red exterior designs also occur. Agua Fria Glaze-on-red occurs throughout the Rio Grande Glaze Ware area. It dates from AD 1315 to 1425 throughout its range, and later (possibly as late as 1550) in the southern portion of its range. Honea (1966) describes a variant of Agua Fria Glaze-on-red with a slightly out-flaring rim, Sanchez Glaze-on-red. This type is found north of Albuquerque and dates from AD 1350 to 1425.\nWhen B rims rather than A rims are present, this type becomes Largo Glaze-on-red (AD 1400 to 1450). Afterwards, all-black painted designs appear to have given way to black-and-red painted designs until the Spanish Colonial period, when some vessels revert to this simpler design scheme. During the Spanish Colonial period, when F rims are present, this type becomes Kotyiti Glaze-on-Red (AD 1625 to 1700).\n\nWhen the slip is more yellow than red, black-design vessels are called Cieneguilla Glaze-on-yellow. This style is found north of Albuquerque and may represent a local innovation as the making of glaze ware pottery spread northward. Cieneguilla dates from AD 1325 to 1425. In the Galisteo Basin, a variant of this type with a slightly flaring lip is known as Sanchez Glaze-on-yellow (Honea 1966) and dates from AD 1350 to 1425.\n\nWhen B rims rather than A Rims are present, black-on-yellow bowls are classified as \"Largo Glaze-on-yellow.\" This type dates from AD 1400 to 1450. Afterwards, all-black painted designs appear to have died out until the Spanish Colonial period, when some vessels revert to this simpler design scheme. During the Spanish Colonial period, when F rims are present, the named type is Kotyiti Glaze-on-yellow (AD 1625 to 1700).\n\nEarly on, potters also learned to make some vessels with contrasting slips—one background color on the inside of the vessel, a different background color on the outside. The options included the red and yellow slip clays used on one-slip vessels, as well as white slip clay probably imported from the west.\n\nSan Clemente Glaze Polychrome dates from AD 1315 (?—this is probably too early) to 1425. In this type, the interior and exterior of each bowl is slipped in a different color. (In jars, the uppermost and most easily reached part of the interior is slipped a different color.) The black glaze paint design applied over the slip often includes dots and serrated lines. San Clemente Polychrome occurs from Albuquerque south.\n\nHonea (1966) has described a variant on San Clemente Glaze Polychrome, Sanchez Glaze Polychrome. The Sanchez variant has a \"slightly out-flaring rim resembling Glaze C rims, but thicker\" (Wilson 2005:54). This rare variant consists of bowls, which are found north of Albuquerque.\n\nLate in the sequence, a variant appears in which black paint designs appear over contrasting interior and exterior slips, with Glaze F rims. This combination is called Kotyiti Glaze Polychrome, however, the same name is used for F rim examples with red-and-black painted designs (see below).\n\nAlmost immediately, it seems, the Rio Grande area potters branched out from black-design tradition of White Mountain Red Ware, adding a scheme involving black and red paint designs on a lighter background. Where red (matte) paint was used, it was almost always outlined in black glaze paint. This specific artistic canon may have been inspired by Ramos Polychrome, a type of pottery made in northwest Chihuahua beginning about 1200. The next question is: was the slip background (1) a single color (which could vary), or (2) contrasting colors?\n\nThe use of red-and-black painted designs apparently began on vessels with yellow slips, but as time went on other slip colors were used. The probable first type in this tradition was Cieneguilla Glaze Polychrome, which differs from Cieneguilla Black-on-yellow by the addition of red (matte) paint elements outlined in black (glaze) paint. Cieneguilla Polychrome dates from AD 1325 to 1425. When B rims rather than A rims are present, this type becomes Largo Glaze Polychrome (AD 1400 to 1450).\n\nWhen C rims are present, the type becomes Espinoso Glaze Polychrome (AD 1425 to 1500). By Espinoso, the slip tends to be off-white rather than yellow, causing the designs to appear more \"gaudy.\" This background color may be in imitation of contemporary Acoma-Zuni wares. Espinoso Glaze Polychrome is most common north of Albuquerque.\n\nWhen D rims are present, the type becomes San Lazaro Glaze Polychrome (AD 1470 to 1515). The background slip color reverted to a tan-reddish continuum. In some instances the red matte paint was not used, and strictly speaking those examples are glaze-on-red designs, not polychrome.\nWhen E rims are present, the type becomes Puaray Glaze Polychrome (willow-leaf profiles; AD 1515 to 1650) or Escondido Glaze Polychrome (rectangular profiles; AD 1515 to 1650[?]). (Jars, such as the one shown, have different rims and are always classed as Puaray rather than as Escondido.) The background slip color ranges from an off-white to yellow or red. By this point the black glaze paint is \"runny\" (during firing), giving the finished vessels a sloppy look. It is not clear whether the runny look is deliberate (due to a change in the paint formula) or unavoidable (due to a change in the available raw minerals). In the area, a local variant, Pecos Glaze Polychrome, has \"stubby\" thickened rims; this variant dates from AD 1515 to 1700.\n\nWhen F rims are present, the type becomes Kotyiti Glaze Polychrome (AD 1625 to 1700), however, the same type name is applied to F rim examples in the San Lazaro (two slip) tradition. Kotyiti Glaze Polychrome is characterized by slapdash designs and by the use of runny glaze black paint.\n\nPottery Mound Polychrome is considered a variant of San Clemente Glaze Polychrome, in the sense that the San Clemente slip scheme (different slip color on interiors and exteriors) is combined with the canon of red matte paint outlined in black glaze paint. In some of the most boldly executed examples of this type, however red matte paint designs are sometimes not framed in black. The background colors used in contrasting pairs include red (grading to orange), yellow (grading to olive), and white (probably using slip clay from the Acoma area, in imitation of Acoma-Zuni wares). Pottery Mound Polychrome dates from AD 1400 to 1490. The sole center of production was Pottery Mound, a village on the lower Rio Puerco (east).\n\nEckert (2003, 2006) breaks this pottery into two types. She uses \"Pottery Mound Polychrome\" to describe A rim bowls slipped yellow to buff on the interior surface and red on the exterior surface, and dates the type from AD 1375 to 1450 or later. She uses \"Hidden Mountain Polychrome\" for A or C rim bowls are slipped red on the interior surface and white on the exterior surface, and dates the type from AD 1400 to 1450 or later. By her standards, the bowl sherd with a C rim shown here is Hidden Mountain Polychrome, not Pottery Mound Polychrome.\n\nThe Mera system, which first keys off rim profiles, is probably best suited to the northern portion of the glaze ware production area—in other words, in the area Mera relied on to develop his system. One recently developed alternative approach, by Franklin (2007), reflects work in the southern portion of the glaze ware area, where the Mera system works less well. Franklin's system recognizes the cross-cutting nature of rim forms and painted designs in the Rio Grande Glaze Ware. In his system, therefore, a bowl with black glaze paint on a red slip background is classified \"Agua Fria Glaze-on-red\" regardless of rim form, and the rim forms (A, B, etc.) are separately recorded for the sherds thus classified. One advantage of this approach is its flexibility. In Wilson (2005), for example, Pottery Mound Polychrome is listed as a Glaze A type but at the production center, Pottery Mound, it occurs with other rim forms (Franklin 2007).\n\n"}
{"id": "17578432", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17578432", "title": "Mother-in-law (sandwich)", "text": "Mother-in-law (sandwich)\n\nThe mother-in-law is a fast food dish of Chicago, consisting of a tamale topped with chili, served in a hot dog bun. The mother-in-law is made with Chicago's unique style of tamale, a machine-extruded cornmeal roll wrapped in paper instead of corn husks, which is typically cooked in a hot-dog steamer.\n\nAlthough African-Americans migrating from the Southern United States may have brought tamales to Chicago, no one knows how this sandwich developed. Some speculate it may have had its beginnings in Mexico City's \"torta de tamal,\" a tamale on a bolillo. The precise origins of the Chicago-style tamale are also obscure.\n\n"}
{"id": "17578625", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17578625", "title": "Club-Mate", "text": "Club-Mate\n\nClub-Mate () is a caffeinated carbonated mate-extract beverage made by the Loscher Brewery (\"Brauerei Loscher\") near Münchsteinach, Germany, which originated in 1924. Club-Mate has 20 mg of caffeine per 100 ml. Club-Mate has a relatively low sugar content of 5 g per 100 ml, and low calories (20 kcal per 100 ml of beverage) compared to other beverages such as Cola or most energy drinks.\n\nAlso available is Club-Mate IceT Kraftstoff, which is an ice-tea variant with slightly higher caffeine content (22 mg per 100 ml) and with more sugar than original Club-Mate.\n\nClub-Mate is available in 0.33-litre and 0.5-litre bottles.\n\nExamples of Club-Mate-based mixed drinks are: vodka-mate; Tschunk, a combination of rum and Club-Mate; Jaeger-Mate, a mix of Jägermeister and Club-Mate; and Goon-Mate, a half-and-half mix of Box Wine (Goon) and Club-Mate.\n\nGeola Beverages of Dietenhofen, Germany originally formulated and marketed Club-Mate under the name Sekt-Bronte since 1924. The drink was only known regionally until acquired by Loscher and marketed under the name Club-Mate in 1994.\n\nIn December 2007, Loscher marketed a Club-Mate winter edition. The limited-edition Club-Mate consists of the original formula mixed with cardamom, cinnamon, star anise and citrus extract. It is since sold regularly for a limited time during winter.\n\nIn 2009, a Club-Mate-styled cola variety was introduced. Unlike other colas, its recipe includes mate-extract.\n\nIn 2013, Club-Mate Granat, a Club-Mate variety with additional pomegranate flavor, was introduced.\n\nAs of July 2010, the company listed additional countries like the United Kingdom, the United States, Belgium, Bulgaria and Luxembourg to reach distributors in 40 countries, primarily in Europe, but also in Canada, Australia, Israel, Turkey and South Africa.\n\nClub-Mate has developed a following in computer hacker culture and tech start-ups, especially in Europe. Bruce Sterling wrote in \"Wired\" magazine that it is the favorite beverage of Germany's Chaos Computer Club. It is also popular at Noisebridge and HOPE in the United States, Electromagnetic Field in the UK and the Hack-Tic events in the Netherlands.\nClub-Mate appeared in numerous leading media websites like Al-Jazeera, TechCrunch and Vice.\n\n\nTschunk is a German cocktail consisting of Club-Mate and white or brown rum. It is usually served with limes and cane or brown sugar.\n\nLike Club-Mate, the Tschunk is a typical drink within European hacker culture and can often be found at scene typical events or locations like the Chaos Communication Congress.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "17580615", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17580615", "title": "Suksil-gwa", "text": "Suksil-gwa\n\nSuksil-gwa (), literally \"cooked fruit\", is a category of \"hangwa\" (Korean confection) consisting of cooked fruit, roots, or seeds sweetened with honey. Common ingredients include chestnut, jujube, and ginger. \"Suksil-gwa\" is similar to—and sometimes classified as—\"jeonggwa\", but has unique characteristics that differentiate it from the \"jeonggwa\" category.\n\nIt has been mainly used for special occasions such as \"janchi\" (banquet), or \"jesa\" (ancestral rite). During the Joseon era (1392–1897), it was consumed by \"yangban\" (scholar-officials) and in royal court cuisine, due to the requirement for good quality fruit and an elaborate cooking process. \"Suksil-gwa\" is usually served with two or three kinds in one dish.\n\n\"Suksil-gwa\" can be divided into \"ran\"-type and \"cho\"-type by the cooking method. Each of the terms is affixed to the main ingredient. The \"ran\"-type involves meshing of the cooked ingredient, mixing them with honey, and shaping the mixture into the shape of the fruit. The \"cho\"-type are made without the meshing process.\n\n"}
{"id": "17583510", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17583510", "title": "Frozen dessert", "text": "Frozen dessert\n\nFrozen dessert is a dessert made by freezing liquids, semi-solids, and sometimes even solids. They may be based on flavored water (shave ice, ice pops, sorbet, snow cones), on fruit purées (such as sorbet), on milk and cream (most ice creams), on custard (frozen custard and some ice creams), on mousse (semifreddo), and others. It is sometimes sold as ice-cream in South Asia and other countries.\n\nIn Canada and elsewhere, the term is often used on imitations of ice cream which do not satisfy its legal definition (\"e.g.\", mellorine).\n\nIn India some company brands like Hindustan Unilever were found selling frozen dessert made from vegetable oils rather than that made with pure milk. As per Indian regulations, ice cream which is made from milk solids, but contains non-dairy fat is categorized and labelled as frozen dessert in India.\n\n"}
{"id": "17585042", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17585042", "title": "Lekach", "text": "Lekach\n\nLekach is a honey-sweetened cake made by Jews, especially for the Jewish holiday of Rosh Hashanah. Known in Hebrew as \"ougat dvash\" (literally, honey cake) the word \"lekach\" is Yiddish, perhaps from the Aramaic, \"lĕkhakh,\" meaning to mix thoroughly. Lekach is one of the symbolically significant foods traditionally eaten by Ashkenazi Jews at Rosh Hashanah in hopes of ensuring a sweet New Year.\n\nRecipes vary widely. Lekach is usually a dense, loaf-shaped cake, but some versions are similar to sponge cake or pound cake, with the addition of honey and spices, sometimes with coffee or tea for coloring. Other versions are more like gingerbread, pain d'épices, or lebkuchen.\n\nThe Jewish tradition of honeyed cakes may date back to basbousa (sometimes spelled basboosa), an ancient Egyptian cake, variations of which are still enjoyed throughout the Middle East.\n\nA very traditional honey cake from Austria contains an equal weight of white rye flour and dark honey, strong coffee instead of water, cloves, cinnamon, allspice, and golden raisins in the loaf, with slivered almonds on top of the loaf. It also has a fair number of eggs, vegetable oil (usually corn oil), salt, and baking powder.\n\n"}
{"id": "17589082", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17589082", "title": "Sweet shells", "text": "Sweet shells\n\nSweet shells (, \"gavvalu\") is one of the typical Indian sweets made in Andhra Pradesh, India. It is a mixture (dough) of plain flour/maida and water or milk. The prepared dough is shaped into small rounds, which are flattened and rolled (on a special tool) so as to take the shape of gavvalu (cowrie shells). These shells are fried in oil or ghee and these shells are poured into sugar or jaggery syrup.\n\n2. Kidyo\n"}
{"id": "17590323", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17590323", "title": "Món cuốn", "text": "Món cuốn\n\nMón cuốn refer to Vietnamese roll and wrap dishes which include a variety of ingredients rolled in banh trang or vegetable leaf; it may include vegetable and herb leaves, or other kinds of vegetable. The range of possible ingredients allows people to select only what they want, according to their taste. The dish is always served with a dipping sauce called \"nước chấm\".\n\n\"Món cuốn\" is a finger food in which the ingredients are cooked but the diners assemble their own rolls. It is also a real variety of fast food because of its fast-cooking process but invented from the old days.\n\n\"Món cuốn\" represents the rich diversity of the Vietnamese cuisine and people. Seeing people having \"món cuốn\", others can recognize their skillfulness, especially women (sayings: \"Learn to eat, learn to speak, learn to wrap, learn to open\").\n\n"}
{"id": "17590400", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17590400", "title": "Hiyashi chūka", "text": "Hiyashi chūka\n\nPopular toppings are strips of \"tamagoyaki\" (egg omelette), carrot, cucumber, ginger, ham, and chicken, or may also contain barbecued pork. The tare sauce is usually made from water, rice vinegar, soy sauce, sugar, sesame oil, and sesame seeds.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "17591231", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17591231", "title": "Burn (energy drink)", "text": "Burn (energy drink)\n\nBurn is an energy drink owned and distributed by The Coca-Cola Company, carrying the official tagline \"Fuel your fire\". Burn is distributed in more than 80 countries including France, Spain, Italy, Poland, Turkey, Russia, Japan, Korea, Bolivia, Brazil, Afghanistan and Mexico.\n\nWoodfett Modz\nBurn's involvement in music consists of initiatives to support and nurture promising talent in the electronic dance music sector.\n\nLaunched at the International Music Summit in Ibiza, Burn Studios is Burn's music platform, set up to showcase and support new talent, contribute to music culture and empower groundbreaking ideas. It has hosted multiple competitions for up-and-coming talents, providing opportunities for mentoring, growth and exposure. The most established of these contests is Burn studios residency, an annual competition for newcomer DJs to receive advice and masterclasses with internationally renowned figures of the electronic dance music industry, with the end prize of a residency in a well-known club in Ibiza. Burn studios' earliest initiatives involved remix contests and DJ workshops featuring Richie Hawtin, Sasha (DJ), Peaches (musician), Telonius, Munk, Moullinex and Phenomenal Handclap Band.\n\nBurn Studios Residency is Burn Studios' annual competition held on Ibiza for newcomer producers and DJs to receive advice and masterclasses with internationally renowned figures of the Electronic dance music industry. The program was established to showcase and support emerging DJ/producer talent. In the words of Burn's Marketing Manager Erik Hofstaedter: \"Burn is all about passion and creativity as a brand and supporting new talent on their way. Burn Studios Residency offers a unique opportunity for up-and-coming EDM talent to kick start their career and get supported on their way.\"\n\nThe program's end prize is a summer-long residency in a prestigious club on the island, including Café Mambo, Sankeys (nightclub) Ibiza and Privilege Ibiza. The first stage of the Burn Studios Residency competition is hosted by the mix-sharing platform Mixcloud, and receives promotion, support and documentation by international electronic dance music publications such as \"Resident Advisor\", \"Mixmag\", and \"DJ Magazine\". In its inaugural year in 2012 Burn Studios Residency received thousands of applications from all over Europe in the form of short DJ mixes, before selected entrants competed in live \"Mix-Off\" sessions, with the winning DJs flying to Ibiza for the Burn Studios Residency bootcamp. The bootcamp phase of the program was documented in a 7-part video series, which collectively received over a million views in their first six months online. In 2013 Burn Studios Residency opened applications up to further global Burn markets including Japan and Brazil, with a \"Wildcard\" option for countries outside of the specified regions. Appointed mentors will include DJs Solomun, Maceo Plex, Steve Lawler, Fatboy Slim, Avicii and Hot Chip's Joe Goddard (musician), with Café Mambo and Sankeys (nightclub) Ibiza as participating clubs.\n\nBurn has worked in close collaboration with platinum-selling French house DJ and producer David Guetta. In this time, Guetta worked with Burn and Partizan Films to produce his feature-length biographical documentary \"Nothing But the Beat (documentary)\" (2011), provided mentoring and support for Burn Studios Residency, and performed at Burn's \"Guetta Meets Guetta\" event in London. \"Guetta Meets Guetta\" was a one-night exhibition and party held in August 2012, where David Guetta collaborated with friend and street artist Mr. Brainwash (aka Thierry Guetta) and fellow DJ Nicky Romero. The event was documented by Burn and the footage was used as a music video for the track \"Metropolis\" by David Guetta feat. Nicky Romero, directed by Mr Brainwash.\n\nA list of Burn's music competitions:\n\nBurn's involvement in extreme sports includes snowboarding, skateboarding, surfing, Formula 1 racing and parkour, providing sponsorship to a number of high-profile athletes and events sponsored across the world.\n\nBurn sponsors snowboarders from all across Europe. The most prominent and senior of these are dubbed \"Burn Units\". Currently, the Burn Units include riders Ståle Sandbech, Gigi Rüf, Sven Thorgren, Werni Stock, Ulrik Badertscher, Arthur Longo, and Mathias Weissenbacher.\n\nBurn is responsible for a number of major snowboarding films. In 2011 Burn released \"Human / Machines\",<ref name=\"Burn Units - Human / Machines\"></ref> where Ståle Sandbech, Mathieu Crepel, Arthur Longo and Gigi Rüf take to the mountains of Norway, Sweden and New Zealand, with the concept of the video looking at whether man or machine-made snowboarding features are the best. \"Black Snow\" is one of Burn's most avante-garde snow films, bridging the gap between art, technology and action sports. It features Burn Units Stale Sandbech, Ulrik Badertscher and Gigi Rüf riding inside one of Europe's largest snow domes, illuminated by LEDs and UV lighting. The soundtrack was provided by famed music producer Baron.\n\nBurn's \"\" is a feature-length documentary made in collaboration with Grain Media. It explores the development of snowboarding with interviews and archival footage with Todd Richards, Gigi Rüf, Terje Haakonsen, Jake Burton, Tom Sims, Stale Sandbech and Craig Kelly. It was directed by Orlando von Einsiedel and Jon Drever and premiered at the 2013 Air & Style in Innsbruck.\n\nThe brand is heavily involved with Air & Style, a TTR 6 Star event. In 2013, Burn's inaugural Burn Style Sessions contest took place at the 20th Anniversary of Air & Style in Innsbruck. Snowboarding legends Terje Haakonsen, David Benedek and Gigi Rüf returned to competition snowboarding for the event, along with Stefan Gimpl, the only rider to have won three consecutive Air & Style titles. \"I don't think anyone ever thought they'd see these guys compete again,\" said Arthur Longo (Burn Unit). \"It's like a piece of history.\" As well as work with Air & Style, Burn have established their own major snow events. Notably, Burn in Snow: a large winter event in Poland with ski, snowboarding and music components held in Skrzyczne.\n\nBurn's sponsored skateboarders also operates under the Burn Units team name and include Rune Glifberg, Timotej Lampe Ignjic, Albert Nyberg and Rasmus Sand.\n\nIn October 2011, Burn launched \"Never Extinguish\", a short film starring Burn riders Rune Glifberg, Dany Hamard, Hugo Maillard and Jonas Skrøder. The film was filmed and shot in Buenos Aires, Argentina and directed by Ash Bolland.\n\nTogether with Kingpin magazine, Burn established the Save Our Spot program to revive some of Europe's most run-down and neglected skateparks, as suggested by the wider skateboarding community. In 2012, the team renovated the neediest skateparks, located in Hungary, Poland and Romania. The workforce included Kingpin's editor Alex Irvine, designers from Eastbound Skateparks, members of Perus skate crew, Rune Glifberg and ex-Burn Units Ignacio \"Nachete\" Morata and Rune Glifberg, whose test runs throughout the build ensured the updates were of a high standard.\n\nThe release of \"Visions\" marked Burn's first foray into the world of parkour. The project takes the form of one central video with several supporting teasers and follows members of the iconic London-based parkour team Storm Freerun. Shot in several locations throughout Bucharest, the protagonists explore urban landscapes, unlikely obstacles and dream-like scenarios with skill and agility. \"Visions\" is a cinematic manifestation of Burn's \"Free State of Creativity\".\n\nIn November 2012, Burn entered Formula 1 racing with a sponsorship deal with the Lotus F1 team. \"The Lotus team is the number one emerging challenger in the sport and has demonstrated exceptional creativity in their approach to Formula 1. We intend to foster that creativity by incorporating art and music in a way that will break the conventions of traditional F1 sponsorship,\" said Emmanuel Seuge, Head of Sports and Entertainment Marketing at The Coca-Cola Company.\n\nBurn's sports ambassadors dates:\n\n\nCaffeine content per 100 ml is 32 mg.\n\n\nTable with countries where Burn is available:\n\n"}
{"id": "17601519", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17601519", "title": "Big M", "text": "Big M\n\nBig M is a brand of flavoured milk that was founded in Victoria, Australia, in 1977–78. It was launched by the Hawthorn-based and newly formed Victorian Dairy Industry Authority (VDIA), which replaced the more regulatory-oriented Victorian Milk Board. The VDIA was given an expanded marketing role by the Minister of Agriculture, Mr Ian Smith. \n\nHe appointed the late Des Cooper (MD of the Victorian Oat Growers Pool) as chairman, and Brian Purtell as general manager. Purtell appointed agricultural-science graduate Peter Granger as Marketing Manager. Granger conceived the VDIA Marketing Plan to introduce branding and promotion to both flavoured milk (Big M) and reduced-fat milk (Rev), and this was embraced by the board. Until this time there had been dozens of small 'zoned' dairies, some selling generic flavoured milks. With the exception of Ducats dairy in Shepparton, sales were minuscule. Ducats faced genuine competition from Midland Dairies, and this acted as a catalyst for innovation by both dairies. \n\nZoning had stifled dairy innovation elsewhere. Attempting to overcome this the Victorian Milk Board had introduced a reduced-fat milk in the mid 1970's called 2:10 The product failed due to lack of co-operation by dairy processors, and the inability of the Board to overcome this resistance. It was one of the reasons the Milk Board was subsequently replaced by the VDIA. Similarly, there was resistance to the launch of Big M and Rev, but it was ultimately embraced by the industry following consumer interest and demand the advertising and promotion generated. \n\nGranger was principally the creative input, with Cooper and Purtell administrators who skillfully maneuvered the launch in the face of industry reluctance and scepticism. The advertising agency George Paterson handled the advertising campaign. They conceived the brand name and contracted Paddington Films to produce the highly successful Big M surfing ads. This was a rare occasion where a government department launched a successful and contemporary consumer product. \n\nBig M accounted for sales of 19 million lites per year, and licence fees of $6 – 6.5 million pa prior to the trademarks being sold in 2000 for almost $62 million. Big M flavoured milk is available primarily in Melbourne, regional and rural areas of Victoria and the southern and western Riverina regions of New South Wales near the state border of Victoria. In recent years distribution of the Big M brand has expanded further north into the rest of New South Wales and into Queensland as well as its state of origin. \n\nThe brand gained initial popularity with its advertising association with surf and the beach culture. There were a number of subsequent ad campaigns in Victoria such as 'Think Big, but not too big'. It is sold in cartons, Tetra Briks and plastic bottles in both fresh and UHT varieties. The Big M brand is currently owned by Lion (formerly National Foods).\n\nBig M is also available in a low fat \"light\" chocolate variety (0.9% fat vs 3.3% for the normal product).\n\nBig M is available in 6 flavours:\nPrevious flavours included:\nThe flavours in bold were advertised as part of a Big M 'Flavour Flashback' promotion in 2010, with one to be voted back into regular sale. The winner was announced on 5 July 2010 as Big Egg Flip. It was retired in early 2011 and replaced with Honeycomb as another limited edition. Honeycomb was subsequently replaced by a limited edition Choc Berry in mid-2011. Egg Flip has subsequently re-appeared in late 2012.\n\n"}
{"id": "17605227", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17605227", "title": "Gwapyeon", "text": "Gwapyeon\n\nGwapyeon () is a jelly-like \"hangwa\" (traditional Korean confection) made with fruits. The colorful fruit jelly is commonly served at banquets. This classic dessert was served in the royal court during the Joseon dynasty.\n\nFruits with tart-sweet flavor and higher pectin content, such as Korean cherry, Chinese quince, apricot, mountain hawthorn, bokbunja, Oriental cherry, bog blueberry and magnolia berry are preferred for making \"gwapyeon\". The jelly can be made by boiling any of the above fruits in water, sieving it, then adding honey and simmering it for a long time on low heat. Starch, agar, or other gelling agents can be used as a time-saver. Boiled fruit juice is then cooled in a mold until it solidifies. It is sliced into bite-size pieces.\n\n"}
{"id": "17610427", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17610427", "title": "Jaecheop-guk", "text": "Jaecheop-guk\n\nJaecheop-guk () is a clear \"guk\" (soup) made with \"jaecheop\", small freshwater marsh clams native to Korea. The soup is considered a local specialty of Yeongnam and Honam regions, where \"jaecheop\" are harvested in the lower reaches of Nakdong River and Seomjin River.\n\nChopped garlic chives or \"silpa\" (thread scallions) along with minced garlic is typically added at the end of the cooking process. The soup is usually seasoned with salt and eaten as a hangover soup. It is also available as a packaged product.\n\n"}
{"id": "17634213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17634213", "title": "Domiati", "text": "Domiati\n\nDomiati cheese, also referred to as white cheese ( \"\"  ), is a soft white salty cheese made primarily in Egypt, but also in Sudan and other Middle Eastern countries. Typically made from buffalo milk, cow milk, or a mixture, it can also be made from other milks, such as sheep, goat or camel milk. It is the most common Egyptian cheese. Unlike feta and other white cheeses, salt is added directly to the milk, before rennet is added. It is named after the seaport city of Damietta (also spelled Damiata, or Domyat).\n\n"}
{"id": "17634819", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17634819", "title": "Choc-top", "text": "Choc-top\n\nChoc-tops (also known as choc bombs in Western Australia) are chocolate-dipped ice-creams popular in both Australia and New Zealand and traditionally eaten at the cinema.\n\nThe traditional choc-top is one scoop of vanilla ice-cream covered in a hard milk chocolate shell, sitting atop an ice-cream cone. Variations include different ice-cream flavours, such as chocolate, strawberry, chocolate chili, and banana. The chocolate shell may be studded with confectionery and mixed with flavourings. Some examples of branded choc-tops include Connoisseur and Golden North.\n\nThough today choc-tops are often mass-produced, many cinemas - including large chains - still make them by hand, and the quality or novelty of a cinema's choc-tops can be a draw for movie-goers.\n\nRowena Foods, established in 1990, was one of the largest distributors of choc tops to cinema chains in Australia, until Bulla Dairy Foods bought them in 2013. \n"}
{"id": "17637906", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17637906", "title": "Guk", "text": "Guk\n\nGuk (), also sometimes known as tang (), is a class of soup-like dishes in Korean cuisine. \"Guk\" and \"tang\" are commonly grouped together and regarded as the same type of dish, although \"tang\" can sometimes be less watery than \"guk\". It is one of the most basic components in a Korean meal, along with \"bap\" (rice), and \"banchan\" (side dishes). In Korean table setting, \"guk\" is served on the right side of \"bap\" (rice), and left side of \"sujeo\" (a spoon and chopsticks).\n\n\"Guk\" is a native Korean word, while \"tang\" is a Sino-Korean word that originally meant \"boiling\". \"Tang\" has been used as an honorific term in place of \"guk\", when it denotes the same meaning as \"guk\" as in \"yeonpo-tang\" (octopus soup), \"daegu-tang\" (codfish soup), or \"jogae-tang\" (clam soup). Generally, the names of lighter soups with vegetables are suffixed with \"-guk\", while heavier, thicker soups made with more solid ingredients used in \"jesa\" (ancestral rites) are often referred to as \"tang\". \"Gamja-guk\" (potato soup) and \"gamja-tang\" (pork back-bone stew) are different dishes; the potato soup can be called \"gamjeo-tang.\"\n\n\"Guk\" is largely categorized into four groups of soups, such as \"malgeun jangguk\" (맑은 장국), \"gomguk\" (곰국), \"tojangguk\" (토장국), and naengguk (냉국). \"Malgeun jangguk\" literally means \"clear (\"malgeun\", 맑은) soup (\"guk\", 국) seasoned with a condiment (\"jang\", 장),\" such as \"doenjang\" (soy bean paste) or \"ganjang\", and is served in a \"bansang\" (반상, regular meal table). The main ingredients for \"malgeun jangguk\" are meat, fish, vegetables, and seafoods. \"Gomguk\", also called \"gomtang\", refers to either a soup type made by boiling various beef parts such as rib, oxtail, brisket, head, and so forth for a long time, or made with ox bone by the same method. The broth of \"gomguk\" tends to have a milky color and to be rich and hearty taste. It can also be made with chicken or pork bone, to produce \"samgyetang\" or \"gamjatang\".\n\n\"Tojangguk\" are based on \"doenjang\" broth and \"ssaltteumul\" (쌀뜨물, leftover water after washing rice for cooking). The taste is usually savory and deep. \"Naengguk\" are cold soups usually eaten in summer. These soups are usually clean and tangy, such as with \"oi naengguk\" (오이냉국, cold cucumber) and \"miyeok naengguk\" (미역냉국, cold wakame soup). \"Kkaetguk\" (깻국, sesame soup), made with chicken and sesame seeds, is thick and serves to replenish and supplement nutrients during hot weather.\n\n\n\n\"Tojangguk\" are eaten all year round. The term emerged in the 1930s in Korean cookbooks.\n\n\"Naengguk\" refers to all kinds of cold soups, mainly eaten in summer. They are also called \"changuk\" (literally \"cold soup\") in pure Korean while the term \"naengguk\" is a combination of a Hanja word and a pure Korean word with the same meaning. The first historical record on \"naengguk\" appears in a poem written by Yi Gyu-bo (1168–1241), a high officer of the Goryeo period (918–1392). \"Naengguk\" is referred to as \"sungaeng\" in the poem, which literally means \"sunchaeguk\", soup made with \"sunchae\" (\"Brasenia schreberi\"). Yi praised its clear and plain taste.\n\n\"Naengguk\" is generally divided into two categories according to taste and ingredients. One group of \"naengguk\" is made by mixing chilled water and vinegar to give a sweet and sour taste; examples include \"miyeok naengguk\" made with \"wakame\", \"oi naengguk\" made with cucumber, \"pa naengguk\" made with spring onions, \"nameul naengguk\" made with garlic, and \"gim naengguk\" made with \"gim\" or \"nori\". The other group is made to supplement health and has rich tastes, such as chilled soup made with chicken, sesame, or soy bean.\n\n\"Gukbap\" (국밥, ) are dishes developed from \"guk\". The term literally means \"soup with rice.\" The dish is typically served in restaurants, and has become popular among the working class since the late Joseon Dynasty.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "17644269", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17644269", "title": "Bowland cheese", "text": "Bowland cheese\n\nBowland cheese is a type of Lancashire cheese, with the cheese having been mixed with apple, sultana and cinnamon prior to setting. It is named after the Forest of Bowland, which is situated in the east of Lancashire in England.\n\nThe idea of Bowland cheese was originally thought up by David Williams, the son of Godfrey Williams, owner of the delicatessen in Sandbach, Cheshire. It was produced in the back of the delicatessen on a small scale with the help of David's two assistants Karl Hollinshead and Matthew Barlow and quickly became popular with the local people of Sandbach. Due to the amount of interest, the idea was taken to the local cheese fairs of Nantwich and Knutsford where it gained popularity. Now Bowland cheese is produced on a much larger scale and supplies many supermarkets.\n\n"}
{"id": "17646015", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17646015", "title": "Seon (food)", "text": "Seon (food)\n\nSeon is a traditional Korean dish made from steamed vegetables such as zucchini, cucumber, eggplant or Napa cabbage and stuffed with meat. Although the term is a counterpart of \"jjim —\" a category of dishes that are made by steaming meat or seafood — the concept is not clearly settled. \n\nOther dishes similar to seon include \"gajiseon\" (가지선, steamed eggplant), \"gochuseon\" (고추선, steamed chili pepper), \"donggwaseon\" (동과선, steamed winter melon), \"museon\" (무선, steamed radish), \"baechuseon\" (steamed Napa cabbage) and \"dubuseon\" (steamed tofu).\n\nTo make a \"hobakseon\" (호박선) or \"oiseon\" (오이선), a cucumber (or zucchini) is cut into pieces about 4 to 5 cm. in length and then quartered. The pieces are lightly salted and then slightly squeezed to drain water from them. Beef or chicken, along with onion, is chopped and mixed with seasonings to make the stuffing. Then, prepared pieces of the cucumber are stuffed with the meat and placed in a pot. After that, pour the vegetable broth on the ingredients until they are partially covered with liquid. Soaked and stuffed cucumber boiled or steamed with the sauce for about 5-10 minutes. The dish is served with slices of \"seogi\" (석이, \"Umbilicaria esculenta\"), chili threads and egg garnish place on top of the cucumber, similarly to \"gomyeong\" (고명, garnishes).\n\nAccording to \"Eumsik dimibang\", a Korean cookbook written during mid-Joseon Dynasty, the historical recipe of the \"donggwaseon\" (동과선, a variety of seon made with \"dongga\" (winter melon)) is very different from today's version. \n\nThick slices of winter melon are lightly parboiled in the water and put into a bowl with the boiled mixture of \"ganjang\", water and oil. In a new bowl boiled \"ganjang\" is mixed with minced ginger and then, poured over the vegetables. \"Donggwaseon\" is served with vinegar which is spread over the dish.\n\nIn \"Siui jeonseo\", a cookbook written in the late 19th century, a recipe of \"hobakseon\" (호박선, a zucchini seon) is similar to the modern one. A zucchini is hollowed out, filled with various condiments and then steamed. A sauce made with vinegar, ganjang and honey is poured over the ready dish. The dish is served with sliced chili pepper, \"seogi\" (석이 Umbilicaria esculenta) and \"jidan\" (fried eggs) that are placed on the zucchini and sprinkled with pine nuts.\n\nHowever, the term did not reach its modern meaning until the late 1930s. Cookbooks that were written before that time use the term very differently. They refer to \"cheongeoseon\" (청어선, steamed and stuffed herring), \"yangseon\" (양선, steamed and stuffed beef intestine), or \"dalgyalseon\" (달걀선, steamed eggs). \n\nToday, the term \"seon\" refers to dish made from stuffed vegetables.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "17649642", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17649642", "title": "Earmark (agriculture)", "text": "Earmark (agriculture)\n\nAn earmark is a cut or mark in the ear of livestock animals such as cattle, deer, pigs, goats, camels or sheep, made to show ownership, year of birth or sex.\n\nThe term dates to the 16th century in England. The practice existed in the Near East up to the time of Islam. Against this, in Q. 4:119 the Qur'an quotes the Devil promising, \"\"I will mislead them, I will entice them, I will command them to \"mark the ears of livestock\", and I will command them to distort the creation of God.\"\n\nEarmarks are typically registered when a stock owner registers a livestock brand for their use. There are many rules and regulations concerning the use of earmarks between states and countries. Tasmanian sheep and cattle must be earmarked before they become six months old.\n\nGenerally the owner’s earmark is placed in a designated ear of a camel or sheep to indicate its gender. Typically if a registered earmark is used, it must be applied to the right ear for ewes and the left ear for female camels. The other ear of a sheep then may be used to show the year of its birth. Cattle earmarks are often a variety of knife cuts in the ear as an aid to identification, but it does not necessarily constitute proof of ownership.\n\nSince the 1950s it has been more common to use ear tags to identify livestock because coloured tags are capable of conveying more information than earmarks. Such ear tags were popularised by New Zealand dairy farmers in the earliest successful use of them.\nBecause of the ubiquity of earmarking, in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, it became common parlance to call any identifying mark an earmark. In early times many politicians were country or farming folk and were adept at using such words in different ways and in creating new concepts.\n\nToday it is common to refer to an institution's ability to designate funds for a specific use or owner as an earmark.\n\nLaboratory mice are often kept with several animals in one cage since mice are social animals, therefore it is necessary to have some method of identifying them individually. Earmarks may be used, although non-traumatic methods such as tattooing their tails and painting spots on white mice with crystal violet or permanent markers can be used as well. Microchips are less commonly used in mice because of their expense compared to the short life span of a mouse.\n\nEarmarking a mutant strain of mice called MRL/MpJ led to the accidental discovery that they had the ability to regenerate tissue very quickly, when scientists working with them found that the holes punched in their ears kept growing back. The holes healed over completely with regenerated cartilage, blood vessels, and skin with hair follicles. It was later found that this strain of mice also heals damage to other body parts such as knee cartilage and heart muscle significantly better than other mice.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "17653927", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17653927", "title": "Pulp (juice)", "text": "Pulp (juice)\n\nPulp is a brand of nectar introduced to the Peruvian market by the Ajegroup in 2004. Pulp is sold in glass bottles of 300 ml and cartons of 150 ml and one litre in the flavors durazno (peach), mango, and piña (pineapple).\n\n\n"}
{"id": "17661139", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17661139", "title": "Taralli", "text": "Taralli\n\nTaralli are toroidal Italian snack foods, common all over the southern half of the Italian Peninsula. A cracker similar in texture to a breadstick, a pretzel, or a sushka, taralli can be sweet or savory. Sweet taralli are sometimes glazed with sugar. Savory taralli may be flavored with onion, garlic, sesame seeds, poppy seeds, fennel, pepper, chili or just salt. Sweet and plain taralli are often dunked in wine.\n\nTaralli are classically formed into rings or ovals about in circumference. Smaller taralli, called tarallini, with a circumference of , are sold commercially. Similar to bagels, they are briefly boiled before being baked, which gives them a very interesting texture. Baked taralli can be kept in an airtight container for several months. Taralli is a sweet that was enjoyed by Roseto (Rosetans) during their early years in America after immigrating from Roseto, Italy, beginning as early as 1882. According to Malcolm Gladwell in his book \"Outliers: The Story of Success\", \"Sweets such as biscotti and \"taralli\" used to be reserved for Christmas and Easter; in Roseto they were eaten year-round.\" \n\nA variation can be made by deep-frying a sweet version of the rings and serving them with a sweet dessert wine. Fried taralli do not keep well and should be eaten quickly.\n\nIngredients for one commercially sold tarallini brand: wheat flour, yeast, water, olive oil, fennel seed, black pepper, salt, anise flavor.\n\n"}
{"id": "17680077", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17680077", "title": "Agwi-jjim", "text": "Agwi-jjim\n\nAgwi-jjim () or agu-jjim () is a Korean \"jjim\" dish made with blackmouth angler, the fish known as \"agwi\" in Korean. The name of the dish is usually translated as \"braised spicy angler\".\n\nThe dish is seasoned with hot chili pepper powder, doenjang, \"ganjang\" (soy sauce), minced garlic, and chopped scallions to make it spicy and hot. However, other ingredients such as \"kongnamul\" (soybean sprouts), \"mideodeok\" (미더덕, \"Styela clava\"), and \"minari\" (미나리, water dropwort) also play an important role in giving \"agujjim\" a refreshing and fragrant flavor. The fish is an excellent source of protein and a has rich taste as well as a palatable chewy texture.\n\nIts origins are known to be a fish market in the city of Masan, South Gyeongsang Province where local fishermen would ask cooks from the market eateries to create a tasty dish from the ugly fish. Until the 1940s, the fish was not eaten and was frequently discarded due to its ugly appearance and low commercial value. However, as fish began to become more scarce in the late 20th century, the newly found delicacy became popular.\n\n\"Agujjim\" is still considered a local specialty of Masan, especially around the Odong-dong district. In the traditional Masan \"agujjim\", \"agwi\" dried for 15 days to 30 days is used and then marinated with seasonings, while other regions use fresh \"agwi\" after its internal organs have been taken out.\n\nSeoul has two famous \"agujjim\" streets, in Sinsa-dong and the Jongno district. The popular \"jjim\" dish is eaten with bowls of cooked rice, or sometimes restaurants will stir-fry the remaining sauce with rice and additional vegetables on the grill to make \"bokkeumbap\" with a crispy charred crust.\n\n\"Agujjim\" is also a popular \"anju\", or dish associated with alcoholic beverages and is usually paired with soju.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "17684438", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17684438", "title": "Freekeh", "text": "Freekeh\n\nFreekeh (sometimes spelled frikeh) or farik ( / ALA-LC: \"farīkah\") (pronounced \"free-kah \") is a cereal food made from green durum wheat (\"Triticum turgidum\" var. durum) that is roasted and rubbed to create its flavour. It is an ancient dish derived from Levantine and North African cuisines, remaining popular in many countries of the eastern Mediterranean Basin where durum wheat originated.\n\nThe wheat is harvested while the grains are yellow and the seeds are still soft; it is then piled and sun-dried. The piles are carefully set on fire so only the straw and chaff burn. Under these conditions, the high moisture content of the seeds prevents them from burning. The roasted wheat is then threshed and sun-dried to achieve a uniform flavour, texture and colour. This threshing or rubbing process of the grains gives this food its name, \"farīk\" or “rubbed”. Finally, the seeds are cracked into smaller pieces that resemble green bulgur.\n\nFreekeh is mentioned in an early thirteenth-century Baghdad cook book as \"farīkiyya\". In that recipe, meat is fried in oil and braised with water, salt, and cinnamon bark. Then, dried coriander is stirred in with young wheat (\"freekeh\") and is cooked. Finally, the meal is served with cumin, cinnamon, and fresh lamb tail fat.\n\nIn Egypt, freekeh is served as \"ḥamām bi’l-farīk\" (pigeon stuffed with green wheat). Freekeh also is prepared in Egypt with onion and tomato, and sometimes, with chicken. \"Shūrbat farīk bi’l-mukh\" is a freekeh and bone marrow soup from Tunisia. \"Freeket lahma\", a green wheat pilaf dish with roasted lamb, spring peas, and pine nuts, comes from Jordan, and \"shūrba al-farīk\" is a Middle Eastern soup with green wheat and chicken.\n\nIn Syria, freekeh usually is prepared with lamb, onion, butter, almonds, black pepper, cinnamon, cumin, and salt. It is also part of Palestinian and Jordanian cuisine.\n\nIn Tunisia and Algeria, freekeh is usually prepared as a main ingredient in a tomato-based soup called \"chorba't frik\", which is considered a traditional national dish.\n\nIn Turkey, where this food is known as \"firik\", a pilaf dish based on freekeh, called \"firik pilavı\", is found in traditional Southern Anatolian cuisine. It may be combined with bulgur; legumes such as chickpeas and various herbs and spices, and sometimes meat, may be added. With the influx since 2011 of millions of Syrian refugees, \"firik\" is available in markets all over Turkey.\n\nFreekeh's nutritional attributes are comparable to other cereal grains, especially durum wheat, from which it is derived, depending on the durum cultivar. Durum is notable for its high content of protein (20% or more of the Daily Value, DV), dietary fiber, B vitamins, and several dietary minerals, especially manganese (143% DV) (table). Before roasting, freekeh is 11% water, 71% carbohydrates, 2.5% fat, and 14% protein (see table displayed at right).\n\n"}
{"id": "17699823", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17699823", "title": "Leather punch", "text": "Leather punch\n\nA leather punch is a hole punch specifically for making holes in leather. The working tip of the punch is a hollow steel cylinder with a sharp circular knife-like edge. The leather piece is placed on a hard surface, which may be a part of the tool set, and the punch is forced through it, cutting out a small circular piece which is discarded. The punch may be a simple metal tool struck with a hammer; or several such punches may be mounted on a rotary turret on a pliers-like tool with an anvil, with the desired size selected by rotating the turret. Hole diameters typically range from about 1mm to 6mm. They are typically used for making holes for buckles, eyelets, and rivets in shoes, belts, bridles, etc.\n\n"}
{"id": "17700382", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17700382", "title": "Cơm nắm", "text": "Cơm nắm\n\nCơm nắm is a Vietnamese rice dish of the Miền Bắc region that is shaped into a roll. The dish is commonly carried by those traveling to unfamiliar areas without restaurants or ingredients familiar to them.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "17700414", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17700414", "title": "Bánh lá", "text": "Bánh lá\n\nBánh lá (/bǎɲ lǎ/), literally meaning \"leaf cake\", is a category of \"bánh\", or Vietnamese cakes, that consist of a parcel of a variety of rice stuffed with some fillings and wrapped in a leaf or leaves.\n\n"}
{"id": "17701564", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17701564", "title": "Jeonbok-juk", "text": "Jeonbok-juk\n\nJeonbok-juk () or abalone rice porridge is a variety of \"juk\" (죽), or Korean porridge, made with abalone and white rice. Abalone is regarded as a high quality ingredient in Korean cuisine and was often presented as a gift to the king of Korea.The dish is a local specialty of Jeju Island where abalones are commonly harvested. \"Jeonbokjuk\" is known as not only a delicacy but also as a nutritional supplement and digestive aid, especially for ill patients or elderly people. \"Jeonbokjuk\" can be made with or without the abalone's internal organs. The former type of \"jeonbokjuk\" has a green tinge while the latter is more ivory in color.\n\nAbalones are first prepared by cleaning with a brush in water, and the flesh is taken out from the flat and middle of the shells with a small kitchen knife. The internal organs are removed separately from the flesh (taking care not to damage them). The flesh is slightly parboiled in a pot of boiling water and then thinly sliced. Rice is soaked in a bowl of water 3 to 4 hours before cooking. The abalone flesh is stir-fried on a pot over a mid-flame with sesame oil, with the soaked rice then added. After stir frying for a while, water is poured into the pot and the dish is cooked at a higher temperature. Constant stirring prevents the ingredients from sticking to the bottom of the pot. After the dish has come to a boil, the heat is lowered and let to simmer. The dish is seasoned with salt or \"ganjang\" (Korean soy sauce).\n\n"}
{"id": "17720623", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17720623", "title": "Belgian chocolate", "text": "Belgian chocolate\n\nBelgian chocolate (, ) is chocolate produced in Belgium. A major industry since the 19th century, today it forms an important part of the nation's economy and culture.\n\nThe raw materials used in chocolate production do not originate in Belgium; most cocoa is produced in Africa, central America, and south America. Nonetheless, the country has an association with the product that dates to the early 17th century. The industry expanded massively in the 19th century, gaining an international reputation and, together with the Swiss, became one of the commodity's most important producers in Europe. Although the industry has been regulated by law since 1894, there is no universal standard for the chocolate to be labelled \"Belgian\". The most commonly accepted standard dictates that the actual production of the chocolate must take place inside Belgium.\n\nBelgium's association with chocolate goes back as far as 1635 when the country was under Spanish occupation shortly after chocolate had been brought to Europe from Mesoamerica. By the mid-18th century, chocolate had become extremely popular in upper and middle class circles, particularly in the form of hot chocolate. Among them was Charles-Alexander of Lorraine, the Austrian governor of the territory. From the early 20th century, the country was able to import large quantities of cocoa from its African colony, the Belgian Congo. Contrary to popular opinion, however, Belgium's colonies did not play an important role in the foundation of the Belgian chocolate industry. By 1900, chocolate was increasingly affordable for the Belgian working class. According to one study, Belgium first started to export more chocolate than it imported in the 1960s, with exports of “Belgian chocolates” growing exponentially since 1980.\n\nThe Praline is an invention of the Belgian chocolate industry, as is the \"ballotin\", a kind of packaging associated with high-quality chocolate that was designed by Louise Agostini, the wife of Jean Neuhaus Jr., in 1915.\n\nThe composition of Belgian chocolate has been regulated by law since 1894 when, in order to prevent adulteration of the chocolate with low-quality fats from other sources, a minimum level of 35 percent pure cocoa was imposed. Attempts to introduce industry standardisation have met with little success. An attempt by the European Economic Community (EEC) to introducing minimum standards of the amount of cocoa butter substitutes across Europe led to prolonged negotiation but the legislation finally enacted, in 2003, was viewed as excessively lenient in Belgium. In 2007, a voluntary quality standard (to which about 90 percent of the country's chocolate makers adhere) was introduced by the European Union which set certain criteria for a product to be considered \"Belgian chocolate\". Under this \"Belgian Chocolate Code\", refining, mixing and concheing must be done inside Belgium. \n\nControversy about what can legitimately be called \"Belgian chocolate\" has been fueled by some traditional Belgian chocolatiers being purchased by non-Belgian companies and even moving production out of Belgium. Ignace Van Doorselaere, chief executive of chocolatier Neuhaus, insists that “In our dictionary, Belgian means place of manufacturing, headquarters and ownership,” but without an EU protected food status designation, those chocolatiers who remain 100% Belgian find the \"Belgian chocolate\" brand hard to protect.\n\nMany firms produce chocolates by hand, which is laborious and explains the prevalence of small, independent chocolate outlets, which are popular with tourists. Famous chocolate companies strictly follow traditional (and sometimes secret) recipes for their products.\n\nPralines made in Belgium are usually soft-centred confections with a chocolate casing. They are distinct from the nut and sugar sweets popular in France and the United States which are sometimes known by the same name. They were first introduced by Jean Neuhaus II in 1912.\n\nThere have always been many forms and shapes: nearly always containing a chocolate shell with a softer filling. Confusion can arise over the use of the word praline in Belgium as it may refer to filled chocolates in general or sometimes to traditional \"praliné\"-filled chocolates popular in Europe (praliné refers to caramelised hazelnuts or almonds ground into a paste). Belgian pralines are not limited to the traditional praliné filling and often include nuts, marzipan, salted caramel, coffee, liquors, cream liqueur, cherry or a chocolate blend that contrasts with the outer shell. They are often sold in stylised boxes in the form of a gift box. The largest manufacturers are Neuhaus, Godiva, Leonidas, and Guylian.\n\nMost commonly in the form of a flaky or smooth chocolate ball or traditionally a truffle-shaped lump, Belgian chocolate truffles are sometimes in encrusted form containing wafers or coated in a high-quality cocoa powder. They contain a soft ganache which is traditionally a semi-emulsion of liquid and therefore has a couple of days shelf-life at low temperatures and/or requires refrigeration. Special truffles sometimes have a fruit, nut or coffee ganache. Rarely they feature a fruit-based liqueur or cream liqueur but remain distinguishable from pralines by their shape and texture in most cases — crossover 'praline-truffles' also exist.\n\nHand-finished and luxury examples of eggs, animals, figurines and Valentine's Day hearts are made by many smaller Belgian chocolatiers, as elsewhere, accounting for a relatively small market share however in peak demand at Valentine's Day, Easter, Sinterklaas and Christmas.\n\nChocolate plays an important part in the Belgian economy, and there are over 2,000 \"chocolatiers\" in the country, both small and large. Today, chocolate is very popular in Belgium, with 172,000 tonnes produced each year, and widely exported. Côte d'Or is probably the largest commercial brand, with their products available in virtually every grocery store in the country. The largest manufacturers of wider varieties of chocolates are mentioned at Pralines. Belgian pralines (fondants) shaped like sea shells, fish, diamonds and individualist creations topped with are sold in town centre shops, market stands and many village shops across Belgium.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "17725350", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17725350", "title": "Onion cake", "text": "Onion cake\n\nOnion cake is a savory or sweet cake prepared using onion as a primary ingredient. Various onion cakes are consumed in China, Germany, Korea, Switzerland, Wales and in other countries. Several types and varieties of onion cakes exist, including laobing, pajeon, the scallion pancake, teisen nionod and zwiebelkuchen.\n\nOnion cake is prepared using onion as a main ingredient along with other typical cake ingredients. The use of boiled onion can reduce the sharpness of the onion's flavor in onion cake. Potato or bacon may also be used as a main ingredient in onion cake. Additional ingredients can include cottage cheese and sour cream. Chocolate cake may be prepared using onion. Various onion cakes are consumed in China, Germany, Switzerland, Wales and in other countries.\n\nIn Chinese cuisine, onion cake may be prepared using spring onion, (also referred to as scallion). A basic Chinese onion cake can consist of flour, lard, spring onion and salt.\n\n\"Laobing\" is a pancake or unleavened flatbread in Chinese cuisine that is prepared with flour, water and salt. Scallions may be used as an additional primary ingredient, and scallions are sometimes served as a side dish with laobing.\n\n\"Pajeon\" is a savory jeon (pancake) dish in Korean cuisine prepared with a batter of flour, eggs and green onions or leeks. Rice flour may also be used, along with additional ingredients, such as seafood, pork and beef. \"Dongnae pajeon\" is prepared using green onion and seafood.\n\nA scallion pancake is a Chinese pancake or unleavened flatbread prepared using scallion as a primary ingredient. It is typically prepared using a dough, although some are prepared from a batter. The scallion pancake is a traditional food in Shanghai, China, and is a common dish throughout the country. In China, fresh scallions are typically used in the dish's preparation. The scallion may be fried before it is added to the dough.\n\n\"Teisen nionod\" is a Welsh onion cake prepared with onion, potato, butter, beef stock, salt and pepper.\n\n\"Zwiebelkuchen\" is a German onion cake or pastry prepared with steamed onion, bacon, cream and caraway seeds on leavened or yeast dough.\n\n"}
{"id": "17726038", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17726038", "title": "Limu (algae)", "text": "Limu (algae)\n\nLimu is the Hawaiian word for algae. There are approximately one hundred Hawaiian names for kinds of limu, sixty of which can be matched with scientific names. Limu played an important part in the ancient Hawaiian diet. It was used to add flavor to an otherwise particularly bland diet of kalo (taro), 'uala (sweet potato), and 'ulu (breadfruit). Limu, sea salt and mashed kukui nuts were the ingredients of 'inamona, a seasoning mixture much enjoyed by early Hawaiians. 'Inamona was used to season many dishes. It was the responsibility of women to gather limu in the tidepools while men would gather those kinds of limu that grew in areas of rough surf in the outer reefs. Limu is still enjoyed by modern Hawaiians but has become increasingly difficult to find because of over-picking, pollution, and construction in watersheds. Many important kinds of limu grow best in brackish water where fresh water empties into the sea. Another threat to native limu in Hawaii is the increasing spread of marine alien invasive species.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "17728755", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17728755", "title": "Berger Cookies", "text": "Berger Cookies\n\nBerger Cookies are a kind of cookie made and distributed by DeBaufre Bakeries. They are topped with a thick layer of chocolate fudge that derives from a German recipe, and are a cultural icon of Baltimore.\n\nThe Berger Cookie recipe was brought to America from Germany by George and Henry Berger in 1835. Henry owned a bakery in East Baltimore that was later run by his son Henry. While the younger Henry took over his father's bakery, his two brothers, George and Otto, opened their own bakeries. Around 1900 Otto died, then George and Henry combined the bakeries to create 'Bergers'. As technology grew so did the bakery. Eventually Henry died, leaving George as the sole proprietor of the bakery.\n\nWhen George retired he sold the bakery and the recipe to Charles E. Russell. Charles' son, Charles Jr., took control upon his father's retirement. Charles Jr. and his sons, Charles III and Dennis, ran the business through the Depression. They employed two brothers, Charles and Benjamin DeBaufre. When Charles Jr. retired in 1967, he left the bakery to Charles III and Dennis. Meanwhile, the DeBaufre brothers left the business to start DeBaufre Bakeries Inc. The DeBaufre Bakery struggled in the first few years but they pushed through it.\n\nDeBaufre Bakeries was able to earn enough of a profit to purchase Berger's from the Russell family in 1969. Charles' son, Charles DeBaufre Jr., purchased part of the business in 1978. Charles Sr. died in 1988 leaving ownership to Benjamin, Charles Jr., and John Koehler. Charles Jr. became the sole proprietor of Berger Cookies in 1994 when Benjamin retired and is still running the successful business in 2019\n\nThe Berger cookie is well known for its thick chocolate frosting layered on top of a shortbread cookie. The recipe has won several awards around the Baltimore area including the 2011 \"Best of Baltimore Award\" and the \"Best Cookie\" award in 2011. The product has also been featured in \"The Baltimore Sun\", \"The View\", and on \"Rachael Ray\" and \"The Best Thing I Ever Ate\" on the Food Network.\n\nBerger Cookies are handmade in a small factory in the Cherry Hill neighborhood of Baltimore. As of 2013, four employees dipped a total of around 36,000 cookies every day. The original recipe that was created by Henry Berger in 1835 is still in use. As of early 2012, the annual sales of DeBaufre Bakeries were about $2.5 million, with Berger Cookies making up 98% of that. \n\nIn February 2012, the company began a limited run of three flavors, strawberry, lemon and rum, that it had last made in 1972, in response to slower sales in January. However, that was just a special edition and was not meant to be something that lasted longer than the week that DeBaufre Bakery sold them for. \n\nThe Health Department closed the bakery in January 2013 because it was operating without the proper license. The bakery does have a federal food license, according to the FDA, and officials there have an ongoing investigation stemming from a routine inspection in January. A spokesman declined to comment on what the investigators have found. Records show the FDA, which does not communicate about its findings with the city, inspected the bakery at least once before, in 2011, and found no serious violations. The bakery has since obtained the proper licenses needed and resumed production March 5, 2013.\n\nIn November 2013 owner and president Charles DeBaufre, Jr. said that the FDA's proposed ban on trans fat could change how Berger Cookies taste because two key ingredients, margarine and fudge, contain partially hydrogenated soybean and cottonseed oil, a source of trans fat. He said attempts to produce the cookies without trans fat have produced discouraging results. He further said that without an FDA exception allowing them to use trans fat, the bakery would continue to test out new recipes or \"go out of business, one of the two.\" However, in November 2017 \"The Baltimore Sun\" reported that DeBaufre's fudge supplier had already changed the recipe and eliminated trans fats over the previous summer, with no apparent impact on the taste but an increase in calories due to additional sweeteners.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "17739518", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17739518", "title": "Cincalok", "text": "Cincalok\n\nCincalok (or Chinchalok/Cencaluk) is a Malaccan/Penang food (see Cuisine of Malaysia) made of fermented small shrimps or krill. It is usually served as a condiment together with chillis, shallots and lime juice. It is similar to Bagoong Alamang (see shrimp paste) in the Philippines, Cencalok in Indonesia and Koei-Cha-Rhoo ().\n\nIn Melaka, the shrimp is called udang geragau. The shrimp in the pinkish coloured cincalok are readily identifiable and the taste is salty. This shrimp is available in particular season in Pantai Klebang, Limbongan, Tanjung Kling and several coastal areas.\n\nThe process of making cincalok requires several steps. Fresh small prawns (udang geragau) are added with salt and rice in equal proportions. After the ingredients are thoroughly mixed, it will be sealed in a jar and allowed to ferment for three days. There are also cincalok-makers who increase the proportion of rice in the mixture believing it to enhance the taste of the finished product.\n\nAs the finished product is fermented in a glass container, the fermentation process causes pressure to build up inside the container. Hence, care must be taken when opening the pressurized container containing ready-made cincalok.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "17740731", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17740731", "title": "Kentucky Tavern", "text": "Kentucky Tavern\n\nKentucky Tavern is a brand of straight bourbon whiskey produced by the Sazerac Company at the Barton Distillery located in Bardstown, Kentucky, who acquired the brand from United Distillers in 1995. The brand was originally produced and owned by the R. Monarch Distillery (RD #24, 2nd Dist.) of Owensboro, Kentucky, which entered bankruptcy in 1898 and was purchased by James Thompson in 1901 who renamed the company Glenmore Distillery Company with locations in Owensboro and Louisville, Kentucky. In 1903 The Kentucky Tavern trademark was first registered. Glenmore proved a successful and durable company, its main brand being Kentucky Tavern. It is usually produced as an 80 proof liquor, although a 100 proof is also available.\n\nIt bears resemblance in color and flavor to that of Kentucky Gentleman, which is also produced by Barton Distilleries.\n\nKentucky Tavern is relatively affordable for bourbon and can be purchased in 200 ml, 375 mL, 750 mL, 1 L and 1.75 L quantities.\n\nIn March 2009, the Sazerac Company of New Orleans purchased the Tom Moore distillery and many brands owned by Constellation Spirits (formerly Barton Brands) as part of a $334 million transaction.\n\n"}
{"id": "17744488", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17744488", "title": "Dasik", "text": "Dasik\n\nDasik(; lit. \"tea food\") is a bite-size hangwa that is normally accompanied by tea. It can be made by kneading grain or other edible seed flour or pollen with honey, then pressing them into a decorative mould called \"dasikpan\" (). A dasik plate usually consists of an assortment of dasik of different colours, including green, yellow, pink, black, and white. Typical ingredients include: rice flour, pine pollen, black sesame, chestnut, and soybean.\n\n\nThe dasik was introduced to Korea some 1,600 years ago from India was Buddhism and that included the tea culture, along with its religious practices and teachings. Tea was first influenced in the culinary culture of Korean royalty and later reached to the upper classes. Due to Korea's climate, it was unsuitable to cultivate, which it was difficult for the elite class to enjoy tea. For Buddhist ceremonies, it was usually prepared, making the temples the center of Korea's tea culture. \n\nThe tea culture flourished during the Goryeo Dynasty (918–1392) and promoted the virtues of Buddhism. During the Joseon Dynasty (1392–1910), tea culture declined as the ruling class adopted Confucian doctrine. The tea culture from Korea eventually reached Japan, which embraced other cultural influences. \n\nHardships of farming not only affected men, but women as well who looked after children and prepared meals after a long day of working in the fields. The government designated one day each month where culinary delicacies were prepared as a way to promote a healthy family life and to free women from some of their daily burden. \nThese monthly celebrations included Seollal, New Year's, the first day of the first lunar month and Chuseok, Harvest Moon Festival, the fifteenth day of the eighth lunar month, when the harvest begins, making it the most abundant time of the year. During these holidays, ancestors were honored with food offerings and would pour alcoholic beverages in a ceremony called charye, a name that came from serving tea or cha to ancestors. The offerings included meat, fish, fruit, and special delicacies, often decorated elaborately. Gokcha, a type of wine and was sometimes used instead of tea. Now, wine is more included instead of traditional tea.\n\nWith families that emphasize formality, the color of the dasik is carefully chosen. The desired taste, color and texture are taken into account during the process of selecting the ingredients and the processing. Dasik arrangements are by color, served on a serving plate that reflects the artistic sense of the host and it sets the tone of the celebration.\n\nDasik is shaped with a wooden or porcelain press that forms a patterned confectionery. The press is engraved with a design that forms an embossed pattern on the dasik piece. The design would symbolize the family's name in order to wish for a long life or for a special event, like \"hwangap\" or 60th birthday or weddings.\nPress the dough into a \"Dasikpan\" that has letters, flowers or a geometric pattern is embossed. The surface of dasik has letters, flower patterns, or Chinese letters 壽·福·康·寧 representing long life, luck, health and peacefulness. \nTwo dasikpan forms one set. Its length is 30–60㎝, width is 5–6㎝, and thickness is 2–3㎝.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "17766343", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17766343", "title": "Sol over Gudhjem", "text": "Sol over Gudhjem\n\nSol over Gudhjem, literally 'sun over Gudhjem', is a Danish dish, an open sandwich with rugbrød, smoked herring, chives and a raw egg yolk (the \"sun\") on top. The island of Bornholm, where Gudhjem is situated, is known for its smoking houses (røgerier).\n\n"}
{"id": "17771480", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17771480", "title": "Le Tourment Vert", "text": "Le Tourment Vert\n\nLe Tourment Vert (translated as \"The Green Torment\") was an absinthe-like liqueur imported from the French Distillerie Vinet EGE, near the French \"commune\" of Cognac. The spirit was created in 2007.\n\nLe Tourment Vert was a mixed and macerated spirit containing the basic ingredients common to true absinthes - anise, fennel and grand wormwood (\"Artemisia absinthium\") - and also contained a combination of herbs, including sage, rosemary, coriander, and eucalyptus and fitted within guidelines for thujone (10ppm) as specified by the U.S. Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau.\n\nLe Tourment Vert provoked criticism among absinthe connoisseurs for being atypical of historical absinthes. The color of Le Tourment Vert had been artificially altered for visual uniqueness, though many absinthe purists found the blue-green color to be unnatural in appearance.\n\nThe U.S. TTB has several classifications for absinthes and related spirits currently available for sale in the U.S., including \"Other Herb & Seed Cordials/Liqueurs\" and \"Other Specialties & Proprietaries\". Le Tourment Vert was classified as an \"Other Herb & Seed Cordials/Liqueurs\" because it was bottled with sugar, unlike true absinthes.\n\nAlthough there has been no official announcement, and bottles of it have been sold in liquor stores as recently as 2010, informed views within the absinthe community suggest that the brand has now been discontinued.\n\nIt can no longer be found via a shopping search on Google.com, or with the wholesalers who used to distribute it from 2007 onwards. The brand website is now just one page, and the social network feeds have been either removed (Facebook) or ceased to be supported (Twitter).\n\n"}
{"id": "17776612", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17776612", "title": "Ladob", "text": "Ladob\n\nLadob is a dish eaten in the Seychelles which is eaten either as a savory dish or as a dessert. \n\nIt was originally a dish eaten in large amounts by the early arrivals to the island due to the ingredients being in plentiful supply. It is now a staple part of the diet, many eating the dish several times a week.\n\nThe dessert version usually consists of ripe plantain and sweet potatoes (but may also include cassava, breadfruit or even corossol) boiled with coconut milk, sugar, nutmeg and vanilla in the form of a pod until the fruit is soft and the sauce is creamy\n\nThe savory version usually includes salted fish, cooked in a similar fashion to the dessert version, with plantain, cassava and breadfruit, but with salt used in place of sugar (and omitting vanilla).\n\nLadob can be served hot or cold.\n\n"}
{"id": "17776740", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17776740", "title": "Shark chutney", "text": "Shark chutney\n\nShark chutney is a dish eaten in the Seychelles. It typically consists of 2 lbs (907.2 grams) of boiled skinned shark, finely mashed, and cooked with squeezed bilimbi juice and lime. This in turn is mixed with onion, pepper, salt and turmeric. The onion is fried and it is cooked in oil.\n\n"}
{"id": "17783487", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17783487", "title": "Olo (online ordering)", "text": "Olo (online ordering)\n\nOlo is a mobile and online food ordering platform that allows customers to order food from online menus and prepay in advance from their mobile or desktop device. The company is based in New York City.\n\nOlo was founded as GoMobo in 2005 by entrepreneur Noah Glass and renamed Olo in 2010 (an acronym for \"online ordering\"). Their registered trademark slogan is \"Skip the Line ®\". Olo works with chain restaurants across the United States; according to a 2015 report in \"Fortune Magazine\", the company had served approximately 10 million customers. The company reports reaching 40 million users in 2017.\n\nAs of 2017, Olo reports having served 40 million users. According to an October 2013 Forbes.com article, clients of Olo have reported having average ticket sizes increase by 25 percent. Some clients have experienced up to a 73 percent increase in ticket size.\nOlo works with restaurants to create mobile applications for the Android, Blackberry, and iPhone, as well as mobile-optimized ordering websites. Their online food ordering products are white labeled and integrate with restaurant point of sale systems.\n\nOlo was the first United States online ordering company to release text message ordering capabilities. The company has raised USD $63.25 million in total funding from Founder Collective, RRE Ventures, Core Capital, PayPal, Staley Capital, the Raine Group, and Danny Meyer.\n"}
{"id": "17822034", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17822034", "title": "Vallée d'Aoste Lard d'Arnad", "text": "Vallée d'Aoste Lard d'Arnad\n\nVallée d’Aoste Lard d’Arnad (PDO) is a variety of \"lardo\" (a cured pork product) produced exclusively within the municipal boundaries of the commune of Arnad in lower Aosta Valley, Italy. It was awarded European Union protected designation of origin (PDO) status in 1996 and is promoted by the \"Comité pour la valorisation des produits typiques d'Arnad - Lo Doil\" producers association.\n\nThe lard, one of a number of preserved meat specialties of the region, is produced by curing pieces of fatback in a brine aromatised with such herbs and spices as juniper, bay, nutmeg, sage and rosemary. The brining takes place in wooden tubs known as \"doïls\", which may be made of chestnut, oak or larch, and are used solely for this purpose; it is known that Lard d’Arnad has been made for more than two centuries since a 1763 inventory from Arnad Castle refers to four doïls which belonged to its kitchens. It is often eaten with black bread and honey.\n\nThe traditional \"Féhta dou lar\" (Arnad Francoprovençal patois for \"Lard Festival\") is a Sagra held each year on the last Sunday of August. It has become a significant tourist attraction.\n\n"}
{"id": "17822319", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17822319", "title": "Coconut candy", "text": "Coconut candy\n\nCoconut candy refer to various candies made with coconut or coconut flavorings.\n\nIn Vietnamese cuisine, kẹo dừa coconut candy is most commonly produced in Bến Tre province, Vietnam with coconut milk and coconut cream.\n\nIn the United States, coconut candy was sometimes spelled as cocoanut candy. These included various traditional confections in the United States. Mason Pecan Cocoanut Candy was made in the 1950s in Milprint, Milwaukee. Squirrel Brand made Cocoanut Zippers. There was also a Mason Cherry Cocoanut candy produced in Mineola, New York. Welch's made Cocoanut Candy Bar from Hinde & Dauch. Welch's Cocoanut candy was also produced by the James O. Welch Company.\n\nSauerkraut candy is made with grated coconut. Grated coconut is often used in various chocolate confections.\n\nThe Bến Tre Province is nicknamed by Vietnamese as the \"Land of Coconut\" (Xu Dua). The Vietnamese term for coconut candy is \"kẹo dừa\", with kẹo = candy and dừa = coconut. Coconut candy was originally associated with Mỏ Cày, a small township within the Bến Tre province.\n\nThe production of Vietnamese coconut candy starts with the grating of fresh coconut flesh. The grated flesh is then pressed to extract coconut milk and coconut cream. The next step is the addition of malt syrup and sugar to this mixture of coconut milk and cream. The ratio of the various ingredients is a closely guarded secret of individual coconut candy manufacturers. The mixing process is often entrusted only to family members of the factory owner. Slight variations in the ingredient ratios can lead to very different texture and taste in the final product.\n\nThe mixture is then heated to a very high temperature in large woks over fires generated by the burning of coconut shells. While being heated, the mixture is stirred continuously to ensure even heat distribution. Traditionally, this stirring process was done manually with large wooden paddles. In larger modern manufacturing facilities, these paddles have been replaced by electric motors. The mixture eventually caramelises to a thicker texture. Recognising when the mixture has been cooked to the right level is more of an art than an exact science. While it is still hot and soft, the thickened mixture is then stringed out into moulds and allowed to cool. The final step sees the candy strings cut into rectangular lozenges, then wrapped and packaged.\n\nTraditionally, coconut candy is wrapped in two layers of wrappings. The inner layer is edible rice paper, and the outer layer is paper soaked in vegetable oil. These measures were necessary to stop the candy from sticking to the paper wrapping. Larger manufacturers now use heat-sealed foil paper, which does not stick to the candy.\n\nBến Tre currently has over one hundred coconut candy manufacturers, making up thirty percent of local enterprises. However, the market is dominated by a handful of well-known brands, with most manufacturers producing candy under licence for these brands. Coconut candy is sold throughout Vietnam. It is also exported to other Asian countries, Australia, Europe, and North America.\n\n"}
{"id": "17825161", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17825161", "title": "Singapore-style noodles", "text": "Singapore-style noodles\n\n\"Singapore\"-style noodles () is a dish of stir-fried rice vermicelli seasoned with curry powder, vegetables, scrambled eggs and meat, most commonly chicken, beef, \"char siu\" pork, or prawns. Leong Yuet Meng, a 90-year-old noodle vendor, is helping keep Singapore foodie culture alive. She runs a noodle stall in Singapore, selling at least 200 bowls on any given day.\n\nThis dish is known as Xing Zhou Mi Fen (星洲米粉) in Singapore. It is very commonly found at Cantonese-style restaurants and take away eateries in Hong Kong. The dish is also very popular in Australian Chinese, Canadian Chinese, and American Chinese cuisine. Being a Hong Kong invention, Singapore noodles are generally unknown and unavailable in Singapore itself. \n\n"}
{"id": "17829638", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17829638", "title": "Poire belle Hélène", "text": "Poire belle Hélène\n\nPoire belle Hélène (; ) is a dessert made from pears poached in sugar syrup and served with vanilla ice cream and chocolate syrup. It was created around 1864 by Auguste Escoffier and named after the operetta \"La belle Hélène\" by Jacques Offenbach. Simpler versions replace poached pears with canned pears and sliced almonds.\n\nIn the film \"Pappa ante Portas\" by Loriot, the main character and his wife keep arguing about the ingredients of a genuine Poire belle Hélène.\n"}
{"id": "17835849", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17835849", "title": "Mud weight", "text": "Mud weight\n\nIn the oil industry, mud weight is the density of the drilling fluid and is normally measured in pounds per gallon (lb/gal) (ppg) or pound cubic feet (pcf) . In the field it is measured using a mud scale or mud balance.\n\nIn conventional drilling fluids, barite is used to increase the density. Although other additives such as halite (salt) or calcium carbonate can also be used. Mud weight can be decreased by dilution or solids control equipment such as an industrial centrifuge, desilter, desander and shale shaker . Mud weight use to control the trapped fluids or gas in the formations by adding a hydro static pressure on them, increasing the mud weight = increasing the hydro static pressure. If the hydro static pressure increased over the formations pressure that will make a fracture in the formation leading to lose the mud to the formation, so adding loss circulation material like gel-flake or wood chips that can refill the gap and stop the mud loss. If the mud loss continues, then the hydro static pressure will decrease and flammable fluids and gas trapped under pressure will start leaking to the surface. This can lead to a potential blowout.\n"}
{"id": "17855346", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17855346", "title": "Penia (bread)", "text": "Penia (bread)\n\nPenia is a sweet bread that originated in rural Italy and is made during the Easter holiday. Ingredients include sugar, butter, eggs, anise seeds and lemons.\n"}
{"id": "17867597", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17867597", "title": "Eggs Neptune", "text": "Eggs Neptune\n\nEggs Neptune is a layered breakfast or brunch dish consisting of a split English muffin, crab meat, poached eggs, and hollandaise sauce. It is a variation of Eggs Benedict with crab meat replacing Canadian bacon.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "17867773", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17867773", "title": "United States beef imports in Japan", "text": "United States beef imports in Japan\n\nUS beef imports in Japan were a contentious issue in Japan–United States relations after BSE was detected in a steer in Washington.\nIn late 2003, Japan suspended all imports of American beef due to a single BSE case in Washington. Japan had been the largest export market for US beef, valued at $1.2 billion in 2003. In December 2005, Japan agreed to remove the restriction on importing US beef. However, in January imports stopped again because inspectors found banned cattle parts in a veal shipment from the U.S. \n\nJapan again halted all imports of US beef in January 2006—just six weeks after the Japanese government began to allow boneless beef from animals younger than 21 months into Japan after a two-year ban—because of bone material found in a shipment of veal from New York State. US Agriculture Secretary Mike Johanns conceded that the shipment had violated the Japanese regulations. Hong Kong, South Korea and Singapore had quickly followed Japan's lead in relaxing the import restrictions. In 2003, Japan accounted for $1.4 billion of the $3.9 billion in global sales of American beef and meat products; there had been two cases of BSE in the United States and 21 cases in Japan at the time. On 27 July 2006, Japan lifted the ban on imports of beef from cattle 20 months of age and younger. In order to protect Japanese consumers from mad cow disease, only meat from cattle that is less than 21 months old is accepted; and spinal cords, vertebrae, brains and bone marrow must be removed.\n\nMichiko Kamiyama from Food Safety Citizen Watch and Yoko Tomiyama, Consumers Union of Japan, said about this: \"The government has put priority on the political schedule between the two countries, not on food safety or human health.\" In 2005, CUJ was highly critical of the resumption of imports to Japan of beef from the United States due to fears about BSE. \"This conclusion was made politically and hastily in response to the American demand that we resume beef imports from the United States,\" said Yasuaki Yamaura to CBS News.\n\n"}
{"id": "17875416", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17875416", "title": "Cit (consciousness)", "text": "Cit (consciousness)\n\nChit () is a Sanskrit word meaning awareness or consciousness, \"true awareness\", \"to be aware of\", \"to understand\", \"to comprehend\". It is a core principle in all ancient spiritual traditions originating from the Indian subcontinent. In Upanishads it is referred to as \"the Drishta\" or \"the Seer\", the Sense that makes sense of all other sense experiences. Chit is one of the three aspects forming the Satcitananda nature of the Absolute, according to the Vedic scriptures.\n\nThe term is widely used and discussed among Hinduism, Sikhism, Jainism and other religious systems.\n\nChitaranjan is who gives you the feeling of awareness and total consciousness.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "17878324", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17878324", "title": "Olvi Cola", "text": "Olvi Cola\n\nOlvi Cola (formerly \"Classic Cola\") is a cola soft drink manufactured by Olvi in Finland. There is also a light version and a vanilla variant \"Vanilja-Kola\".\n\n"}
{"id": "17910841", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17910841", "title": "Flexible glass", "text": "Flexible glass\n\nFlexible glass is a legendary lost invention from the time of the reign of the Roman Emperor Tiberius Caesar (between 14–37 AD). As recounted by Isidore of Seville, the craftsman who invented the technique brought a drinking bowl made of flexible glass before Caesar who tried to break it, whereupon the material dented, rather than shattering. The inventor then repaired the bowl easily with a small hammer. After the inventor swore to the Emperor that he alone knew the technique of manufacture, Tiberius had the man beheaded, fearing such material could undermine the value of gold and silver.\n\nThe story of the sad fate of the inventor of unbreakable glass (vitrum flexile) at the hands of Tiberius (42 BC – 37 AD) was first related by two more-or-less contemporary compilers, namely Petronius (c. 27–66 AD, \"Satyricon\" 51) and Pliny the Elder (23–79 AD, Naturalis Historia XXXVI.lxvi.195). Pliny apparently did not believe in vitrum flexile, remarking that the story is, \"more frequently told than it is reliable\". Cassius Dio (c. AD 150–235, Historia Romana 57.21.7) also told a similar story, writing that ‘an architect whose name no one knows’ whom Tiberius had exiled out of jealousy for his skill, ‘approached him to crave pardon, and while doing so purposely let fall a crystal goblet; and though it was bruised in some way or shattered, yet by passing his hands over it he promptly exhibited it whole once more. For this he hoped to obtain pardon, but instead the emperor put him to death.’ The story was picked up and retold by Isidore of Seville (c. 560–636, Etymologiae XVI.16.6, ‘De vitro’). Subsequently the 13th century collection of technical recipes by the pseudo-Heraclius included this story, in the section treating glass recipes, using Isidore’s own words (De coloribus et artibus Romanorum III.vi [256]). This is thus an example of ‘technical knowledge’ wending its way from historical gossip (Petronius), to a technical encyclopaedia (Pliny, with reservations), and then via a philological text (Isidore) to a collection of practical craft recipes (pseudo-Heraclius).\n"}
{"id": "17922530", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17922530", "title": "Centrepiece", "text": "Centrepiece\n\nA centrepiece is an important item of a display, usually of a table setting. Centrepieces help set the theme of the decorations and bring extra decorations to the room. A centrepiece also refers to any central or important object in a collection of items.\n\nOn the table, a centrepiece is a central object which serves a decorative purpose. However, centrepieces are often not too large, to avoid difficulty with visibility around the table and to allow for the easier serving of dishes. \n\nOther centrepieces are often made from flowers, candles, fruit, or candy.\n\nCentrepieces are a major part of the decoration for a wedding reception, being used widely at wedding receptions with flowers being the most popular form of centrepieces. Weddings, baby showers, engagement parties, anniversary parties and birthdays often have some form of centrepiece.\n\nFormal functions in Europe can sometimes have very elaborate centrepieces, which can span the entire length of the table.\n\nAt holiday times, including Valentine's Day, Easter, Halloween, Thanksgiving, and Christmas, homes are often decorated with holiday centrepieces.\n\nIn September 2017, Lipscomb University President Randy Lowry had to apologize after he invited African-American student to a dinner with \"stalks of cotton\" (a symbol of slavery in the United States) as centerpieces.\n"}
{"id": "17939090", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17939090", "title": "Potbrood", "text": "Potbrood\n\nPotbrood (\"pot bread\") is bread first made by the Boer settlers of what is now South Africa. Potbrood was traditionally baked in a cast-iron pot (also known as a Dutch oven) in a pit made in the ground and lined with hot coals. Today potbrood is often made at a braai by packing charcoal or wood coals around a cooking pot.\n\n"}
{"id": "17943540", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17943540", "title": "Suspiro de limeña", "text": "Suspiro de limeña\n\nSuspiro de limeña or Suspiro a la limeña is a dessert of Peruvian gastronomy. A literal translation of the dessert's name is \"Sigh of Lima Lady\".\n\nThe origins of the dessert are in the middle of the nineteenth century in Lima, Peru.\n\nIts history starts with the wife of poet Jose Galvez, Amparo Ayarza, who invented the recipe. Galvez gave it its name because it is sweet and light \"like a woman's sigh\".\n\nThe dessert is based around manjar blanco, the Peruvian name for what is known as dulce de leche elsewhere in South America, itself coming from blancmange, a dish from the Middle Ages. Blancmange came to Peru from Spain. It consisted of a thick cream made of milk, sugar, almond flour and some Iberian ingredients. An even older recipe had it made of chicken breast boiled in milk, almonds and thickened with flour and was meant as a bland food for the sick and weak.\n\nThe other element of the Suspiro de Limeña is meringue, also brought to Peru by the Spaniards.\n\nThe dessert is consumed mainly in Lima and in other Peruvian cities. It is a staple of Peruvian restaurants abroad.\n\nThe manjar blanco layer of the dessert is made with whole milk and sugar boiled until thick and caramel colored to which are added egg yolk and vanilla essence .\n\nThe merengue top layer is made from egg whites and port wine and is sprinkled with cinnamon.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "17945187", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17945187", "title": "Bollo", "text": "Bollo\n\nBollo is a bun made from corn, yuca or potato. Variations are eaten in Spanish, Colombian and Panamanian cuisine. Corn and yuca bollos are an indigenous food of the Caribbean coast of Colombia and Panama, where they are boiled in leaves. This preparation is similar to the humita of the Andes, the hallaquita of Venezuela and the pamonha of Brazil. In Cuba, black-eyed pea bollos, similar to hushpuppies, are eaten. \n\nIn Colombia, bollos are sold by street vendors along the Colombian coast, as well as in stores and supermarkets. They are primarily served for breakfast as an accompaniment with cheese.\n\nPanamanian bollo has been described as a type of tamale.\n\n"}
{"id": "17957517", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17957517", "title": "Hafta", "text": "Hafta\n\nHafta (Persian: هفته) is the Persian word for week and is also used as a loanword in Hindi, Sylheti, Urdu and Turkish. A week has seven days, and is possible that it could be from Hepta, for seven.\n\nHafta (Devanagari: हफ़्ता) is also slang for the protection money collected periodically by gangsters and corrupt policemen. In case of policemen, however even bribes paid are often quoted as giving \"hafta.\" This meaning seems to have gained its popularity because of its usage as part of Bombay Hindi. It is named so because the most common collection period is one week. The practice is highly prevalent in India and a refusal to pay up has its consequences.\n\n\"Hafta\" has been used in the title of low-budget action movies in Bollywood. Some of the examples include movies like \"Hafta Vasuli\" (1998), \"Hafta Bandh\" (1991).\n"}
{"id": "17958610", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17958610", "title": "Roast lamb with laver sauce", "text": "Roast lamb with laver sauce\n\nRoast lamb with laver sauce is a recipe associated with Wales and Welsh cuisine.\n\nLamb and mutton dishes are widespread and common in all the old counties of Wales and have long been traditional, with all regions having their own variations and contribution, let alone the various sheep breeds, to make to a lamb dish worthy of being the national dish.\nMountain lamb is sweet,<br>\nValley lamb is fatter,<br>\nI therefore deemed it meet<br>\nTo carry off the latter!<br>\n(Traditional Welsh ditty).\n\nThe meal is a contender for the national dish of Wales, and has a long tradition and historical provenance. \"A capital dinner! You don't get moor mutton with laver sauce every day!\" (Collins 1875). The dish was eaten by George Borrow and is worthy of a mention in Wild Wales in 1856.\n\nSalt marsh lamb from the River Towy is also popular in South Wales\nThis is Gordon, Where's the lamb sauce?!\n\n\n"}
{"id": "17966625", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17966625", "title": "Spring soup", "text": "Spring soup\n\nSpring soup is a soup made with ingredients that are only in season for a short period during spring. Although asparagus largely characterizes spring soup, spring soup may include just about any spring vegetable added to a broth, chowder, or bisque. Spring soup is popular largely because it includes fresh ingredients not seen for a while by the consumer.\n\nWhere winter soups are hearty to \"warm and fortify\", spring soups aim to celebrate \"new skies and freshness\" by being \"delicate and light, pretty and promising.\" Spring soups need lighter, brighter tastes and textures than their winter counterparts. A reason for this is that spring soups \"capture the essence of the season in a clean-tasting, refreshing broth that showcases the pure flavors\" of its ingredients.\n\nIngredients used in spring soup include a purée of pea, asparagus, rapini, and fennel, with asparagus being considered the quintessential spring vegetable to largely characterize spring soup. Spring soups typically show a subtle green color to reflect spring.\n\nIn 1828, \"The British Almanac\" provided housekeepers' information to add spring soup to a July menu. In 1896, the Holland Society of New York published a spring soup recipe that included amontillado, olives, almonds, chicken, and radishes. In 1898, spring soup was defined as a soup having a stock with any spring vegetables added that have first been parboiled in water, with the soup often colored with caramel.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "17972814", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17972814", "title": "List of sour soups", "text": "List of sour soups\n\nVarious sour soups, characterized by their sour taste, are known in various East Asian, Southeast Asian, and Slavic cuisines.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "17973912", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17973912", "title": "Pagliata", "text": "Pagliata\n\nPagliata is a traditional Roman dish primarily using the intestine of a young calf. As it has only eaten milk, the resulting dish is similar to cheese in a sausage casing.\n\nIt is usually plaited for serving.\n\n"}
{"id": "17982271", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17982271", "title": "Kababayan", "text": "Kababayan\n\nIn Philippine languages, kababayan means \"fellow Filipino, countryman, or townmate\". It is used throughout the Philippines and throughout the various Philippine languages.\n\nLiterally, \"ka-\" means \"co-\" and \"bayan\" means \"town\". In the narrow sense, \"kababayan\" means a fellow from the same town. However, it is often used in a much broader sense to mean countrymen or compatriots, especially by overseas Filipinos, OFWs, and connotes respect for each other’s commitment to unity because of their common cultural, political, and religious background from the same \"bayan\", broadly defined.\n\nIt should not be confused with \"balikbayan\", a similar Filipino word, which refers exclusively to overseas Filipinos. \"Balikbayan\" often refers to (often wealthier) Filipinos who reside overseas and visit the Philippines periodically, even for extended stays, whereas \"kababayan\", when applied to overseas Filipinos, means ones that live in the Philippines but are overseas temporarily, even for years.\n\n\"Kababayan\" is also the name of the Filipino-American club at University of California Irvine. It has more than 400 members and is affiliated with Kaba Modern from MTV's \"America's Best Dance Crew\".\n\nIt is also the name of a kulintang-shaped muffin in the Philippines.\n\n"}
{"id": "17985506", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17985506", "title": "Tropological reading", "text": "Tropological reading\n\nTropological reading is a Christian tradition, theory, and practice of interpreting the figurative meaning of the Bible. It is part of Biblical exegesis.\n\nAccording to ideas developed by the Church Fathers, the literal meaning, or God-intended meaning of the words of the Bible, may be either figurative or non-figurative; for instance, in the \"Song of Songs\" (also called \"Canticles\" or \"Song of Solomon\"), the inspired meaning is always figurative. The \"typical meaning\" is the inspired meaning of words referring to persons, things, and actions of the Old Testament which are inspired types of persons, things, and actions of the New Testament.\n\nThe early uses of \"allegory\" and \"tropology\" were very close. Later a clearer distinction was made between the allegorical mystical, and tropological moral, styles of interpretation.\n\nLiterary critic Henry Louis Gates also defines tropological revision in relation to African-American literature, in his work \"The Signifying Monkey\".\n\n\n"}
{"id": "17990187", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17990187", "title": "J.T.S. Brown", "text": "J.T.S. Brown\n\nJ. T. S. Brown is a Kentucky bourbon whiskey produced by the Heaven Hill Distillery company. The distilling operation is in Louisville, Kentucky and aging and bottling operations are in Bardstown, Kentucky. The primary expression of the brand is 40% alcohol by volume (ABV), or 80 U.S. proof. There is also a 100 proof bottled in bond version.\n\nThe brand was named after John Thompson Street Brown Jr., who together with his half-brother George Garvin Brown, opened a wholesale liquor business that later became the Brown-Forman corporation. The brand was originally produced by J.T.S. Brown and Sons in 1855, and ownership of the brand eventually devolved to Heaven Hill, a company founded in 1935.\n\nPrior to its destruction by fire in 1996, Heaven Hill had its distillery in Bardstown. After the fire, distilling capacity in the Louisville area was temporarily made available as a goodwill gesture by the Brown-Forman corporation, and Fortune Brands also assisted with some capacity at its Jim Beam distillery. Heaven Hill subsequently opened a distillery called the Bernheim distillery in Louisville (very close to Brown-Forman's distillery), where Heaven Hill's distilling has been conducted since then. Although Heaven Hill no longer operates a distillery at its company headquarters in Bardstown, its rick houses for aging and its bottling operations were kept in Bardstown, about 40 miles away from the current distillery.\n\n"}
{"id": "17990330", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17990330", "title": "Hauskyjza", "text": "Hauskyjza\n\nHauskyjza (Silesian: \"home cheese\" from the German \"Hauskäse\") - a foodstuff made of cottage cheese, carum and other ingredients, which are mixed, put aside for a few days to acquire the characteristic sharp flavor, scent and tacky consistency, and then warmed and fried. Often baking soda is used to condition the cottage cheese. Hauskyjza or Ser Smazony (fried cheese) or Ser Zgliwiały ( rottened cheese) is a traditional product in Wielkopolska, Pomorze, Kujawy and Silesia. Before refrigerators were widely available, it was valued because of its high fastness.\n\nHaukyjza has an exceptionally strong scent and flavor, pleasurable to many aficionados, but found offensive by some people. (In numerous Silesian jokes, the flavor is compared to that of long-unwashed socks.) Most traditionally, it is served with dark bread and carway or with \"music,\" chopped onions soaked in vinegar and oil. Some people prefer it freshly made as a type of fondue.\n\nHauskyjza has been traditionally made at home, hence the name. Currently, it is also produced commercially.\n\nIn 2005, it was registered on a \"List of Traditional Products\" (pol. \"Lista Produktów Tradycyjnych\") of Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development as \"Ser domowy smażony z kminkiem, z czosnkiem, bez przypraw\" (\"home-made fried cheese with carum, with garlic, without spices\").\n"}
{"id": "17996305", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17996305", "title": "Pyeonyuk", "text": "Pyeonyuk\n\nPyeonyuk () is a traditional Korean dish, which consists of thinly sliced meat that has been boiled and pressed. Either beef or pork may be used to make the dish.\n\nIt is eaten as \"anju\" (an accompaniment to alcoholic drinks), or used as a topping for other dishes such as \"naengmyeon\" (cold noodles) and \"seolleongtang\" (ox bone soup). In the past, \"pyeonyuk\" was made during the preparation of a large amount of beef stock or broth for various dishes served during feasts and banquets. Today, it is also used in non-traditional dishes, such as a cold cut in wrap sandwiches, and is considered to be a healthier alternative to deep-fried, stir-fried, or roasted meat.\n\nBeef \"pyeonyuk\" mainly uses brisket, plate, foreshank, tongue, testicle, mammary, head, liver, spleen, and trotters, while pork \"pyeonyuk\" uses belly, head, and trotters.\n\nThe meat is always soaked in cold water to remove blood, and it is boiled as a whole chunk until tender. The broth for cooking the meat is flavored with salt and other seasonings that may vary from household to household, and can include \"doenjang\" (soybean paste), soju, \"cheongju\" (rice wine), black peppercorns, or coffee powder. Scallions and whole garlic cloves are a common addition in the broth when beef is used, and sliced ginger for pork.\n\nAfter the meat is tender, it is wrapped in cloth and pressed with a weight. Then it is sliced thin and served with a dipping sauce: \"cho-ganjang\" (soy sauce–vinegar mixture) or \"gyeoja-chojang\" (soy sauce, vinegar, and mustard mixture) for the beef \"pyeonyuk\", and \"saeu-jeot\" (salted shrimps) for the pork \"pyeonyuk\". Pork \"pyeonyuk\" may also be eaten wrapped with \"baechu-kimchi\" (cabbage kimchi), or in lettuce or perilla leaves as \"ssam\" (wrap). Common side dishes for \"pyeonyuk\" include \"geotjeori\" (fresh kimchi), \"mu-mallaengi-muchim\" (spicy dried radish salad), and \"saengchae-muchim\" (spicy vegetable salad).\n\n\"Pyeonyuk\" may also be used as a topping for other dishes such as \"naengmyeon\" (cold noodles), and \"seolleongtang\" (ox bone soup).\n\n"}
{"id": "18002972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18002972", "title": "Rs6314", "text": "Rs6314\n\nIn genetics, rs6314, also called His452Tyr or H452Y, is a gene variation, a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP), in the \"HTR2A\" gene that codes for the 5-HT receptor.\nThe SNP is located in exon 3 of the gene and the change between C and T results in a change between histidine (His) and tyrosine (Tyr) at the 452nd amino acid, i.e., it is a missense substitution.\n\nAs 5-HT is a neuroreceptor the SNP has been investigated in connection with neuropsychiatric disorders\nand other brain-related variables.\nA 2003 study looked at memory performance and found that His/His subjects performed better.\nAnother study reported that the SNP had an effect on the memory performance in young adults.\nThis has been replicated by another group.\n\nThe His452Tyr variant may influence cell signaling.\n\nrs6311, rs6313 and rs7997012 are other investigated SNPs in the \"HTR2A\" gene.\n"}
{"id": "18002999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18002999", "title": "Tatparya", "text": "Tatparya\n\nTatparya is a Sanskrit word which means \"intention\". This is most often used in the context of written material and is used to indicate the original intention of the author in putting down a certain statement. The innate possibility of multiple interpretations that the Sanskrit language allows for makes obtaining the \"Tatparya\" an involved subject.\n\nMany Hindu scholars and philosophers have, over the years, written their decisions (Nirnaya in Sanskrit) on the Tatparya of various scripts such as the Mahabharata, Bhagavadgita, etc. The Mahabharata Tatparya Nirnaya by Sri Madhvacharya is one such work.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "18012176", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18012176", "title": "Rs1954787", "text": "Rs1954787\n\nRs1954787 is a gene variation, a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the GRIK4 gene.\nA study has reported that this polymorphism is associated with success of antidepressant treatment.\n"}
{"id": "18012457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18012457", "title": "Rs6265", "text": "Rs6265\n\nRs6265, also called Val66Met or G196A, is a gene variation, a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the BDNF gene that codes for the so-called brain-derived neurotrophic factor.\n\nWell over a hundred research studies have examined the polymorphism.\n\nA number of studies have examined the role of this polymorphism in risk of neuropsychiatric disorders \n, including schizophrenia and depression.\nIt is generally thought that some variants of the polymorphism lead to memory impairment and susceptibility to neuropsychiatric disorders,\nand a 2007 meta-analysis of case-control studies found a relationship between the SNP and substance-related disorders, eating disorders, and schizophrenia.\nAnother 2007 meta-analysis could, however, find no association between the SNP and schizophrenia or bipolar disorder.\nMeta-analyses of Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease also indicate that the SNP has little or no association with these diseases.\nAlso inconsistencies in association studies with depression have been noted.\n\nThe reason for these inconsistent results have been suggested to stem from several sources, with one recent review arguing that statistical artefact, sampling bias, population stratification and uncontrolled gene-environment interactions are likely to underscore this effect \n. These same authors recently published a report which found that transgenic mice engineered to express human BDNF as well as carry the Val66Met permutation are selectively sensitive to the glucocorticoid stress hormone corticosterone (rodent equivalent of cortisol), which in turn primes the fear circuitry and hippocampus-dependent memory function of Met/Met homozygous mice \n. As hippocampal function is a core component of several psychiatric conditions, and stress is a non-specific but substantial risk factor for affective, anxiety, eating and psychotic disorders, Notaras et al. argue that \"\"there is a long-term effect of glucocorticoids in 66Met carriers that potentiates the fear circuitry into adulthood, which may increase susceptibility to trauma, events with negative emotional valence and related psychopathology\"\". This interpretation is consistent with a suggested role of BDNF and the Val66Met polymorphism in post-traumatic stress disorder, where it has been shown that 66Met variant perturbs extinction learning in both man and mouse.\n\nIn treatment response studies val/val homozygotes may respond better than met allele carriers with drug resistant depression treated with repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation.\n\nOne study has reported that met/met carriers tends to have lower body mass index compared to the two other genotypes.\nAnother study showed that subjects with the val/val genotype had higher mean intelligence.\nThe same study found no association with personality traits as measured with the Tridimensional Personality Questionnaire.\nAlso a Polish 2007 study observed no significant relationship between the polymorphism and personality in healthy females.\nA German 2005 study could though find an association with personality traits measured with NEO-Five Factor Inventory, with Val/Val subjects scoring higher on anxiety and neuroticism dimensions.\nLarge studies and a meta-analysis inclusive of over 15,000 subjects, however, found no association between the Val66Met and Neuroticism.\n\nA study in transgenic mice has found that met/met mice exhibits increased anxiety-related behaviors.\n"}
{"id": "18012730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18012730", "title": "Ulmyeon", "text": "Ulmyeon\n\nUlmyeon (hangul: 울면) is a noodles, vegetables (including shiitake mushrooms, white button mushrooms, and carrots), egg, and seafood (including sea cucumber, shrimp, and squid or cuttlefish) in a chowder-like broth that is thickened with cornstarch. It is derived from a Chinese dish called \"wēnlŭmiàn\" (溫滷麵).\n\nA variation on the dish is \"samseon ulmyeon\" (삼선울면).\n\n"}
{"id": "18015775", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18015775", "title": "Pizza-ghetti", "text": "Pizza-ghetti\n\nPizza-ghetti is a combination meal commonly found in fast food or family restaurants throughout the province of Quebec and other parts of Canada.\n\nIt consists of a pizza, sliced in half, accompanied by a small portion of spaghetti with a tomato based sauce. Although both pizza and spaghetti are considered staples of Italian cuisine, combining them in one dish is completely unknown in Italy. A infrequent variant involves using spaghetti as a pizza topping, under the pizza's mozzarella cheese.\n\nIn some instances, especially in the United States, \"pizza-ghetti\" refers to a home-made spaghetti dish cooked with the basic ingredients of a pizza, such as tomato sauce and cheese, but without a pizza crust. The mixture may be cooked in a pot or baked in an oven.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "18018318", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18018318", "title": "Piragua (food)", "text": "Piragua (food)\n\nA piragua is a Puerto Rican shaved ice dessert, shaped like a pyramid, consisting of shaved ice and covered with fruit-flavored syrup. Piraguas are sold by vendors, known as piragüeros, from small colorful pushcarts. Besides Puerto Rico, piraguas can be found in mainland areas of the United States that have large Puerto Rican communities, such as New York and Central Florida.\n\nIn most Spanish-speaking countries, the word \"piragua\" means a pirogue, a small, flat-bottomed boat.\n\nIn Puerto Rico, the word \"piragua\" refers to a frozen treat made of shaved ice and covered with fruit flavored syrup. Unlike the American snow cone which is round and resembles a snowball, the piragua is pointy and shaped like a pyramid. The word \"piragua\" is derived from the combination of the Spanish words \"pirámide\" (\"pyramid\") and \"agua\" (\"water\"). In Latin America, frozen treats similar to the piragua are known by many different names.\n\nA piragua vendor is known as a \"piragüero\". Most piragüeros sell their product from a colorful wooden pushcart that carries an umbrella, instead of from a fixed stand or kiosk.\n\nThe piragüero makes the treats from the shavings off a block of solid ice inside his cart and mixtures of fruit-flavored syrups. The tropical syrup flavors vary from lemon and strawberry to passion fruit and guava. Once the syrups are ready, the piragüero will go to his place of business, which in Puerto Rico is usually close to the town plaza, while in the United States it is usually close to the public parks near Hispanic neighborhoods, to sell his product.\nIn the process of preparing a piragua, the piragüero shaves the ice from the block of ice with a hand ice shaver. He then puts the shaved ice into a cup and uses a funnel-shaped tool to give it the distinctive pyramid shape. The piragüero finishes making the piragua when he pours the desired flavored syrup over it. Piragüeros only go out on hot sunny days because those are the only days when they can expect good business.\n\nUnlike the typical American snow cone, which is often eaten with a spoon, the piragua is eaten straight out of the cup or sipped through a straw.\n\nFlavored syrups commonly used in piraguas include the following:\nTwo of the terms used for fruit flavors in Puerto Rico are not common in other Spanish-speaking places. \"China\", a sweet orange flavor, is referred to as \"naranja\" in most other Spanish-speaking locales; however, in Puerto Rico, \"naranja\" refers only to the bitter orange. \"Melón\", an Anglicism derived from the English word watermelon, is called \"sandía\" in standard Spanish.\n\nIn the 1940s, during the Puerto Rican Great Migration in which large numbers of Puerto Ricans moved to New York, they took with them their customs and traditions, including the piraguas.\n\nAccording to \"Holding Aloft the Banner of Ethiopia\" by Winston James, piraguas were introduced in New York by Puerto Ricans as early as 1926. In his book, James describes the presence of piragua pushcarts during the Harlem Riots against the Puerto Rican migrants in July 1926. Author Miguel Meléndez, who moved from New York City to Chicago in the late 1950s, expresses in his book \"We Took the Streets: Fighting for Latino Rights\" the following: \n\nThe piragua was mentioned by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in a blog post titled \"What's in Your Piragua?\" EPA Deputy Administrator Marcus Peacock noted that the EPA had helped the Puerto Rican government negotiate over $1 billion in new water treatment improvements, and added, \"As this commitment is fulfilled, the water will just get cleaner and cleaner whether it is coming out of a tap or is served in a piragua (no, not a canoe, but a Puerto Rican snow cone) – regardless of the weather.\"\n\nPiragua vending is not limited to Puerto Rico and New York. Piragüeros with their piragua pushcarts can be found in Hispanic neighborhoods in Bridgeport, Chicago, Jersey City, Miami, Newark, Philadelphia, and elsewhere.\n\nThe Puerto Rican piragua has been the subject of paintings and sculpture, a children's book, and songs in a Broadway musical:\n\n\n"}
{"id": "18020517", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18020517", "title": "Steak frites", "text": "Steak frites\n\nSteak-frites, meaning \"steak [and] fries\" in French, is a very common and popular dish served in brasseries throughout Europe consisting of steak paired with French fries. It is considered by some to be the national dish of Belgium, which claims to be the place of its invention.\n\nHistorically, the rump steak was commonly used for this dish. More typically at the present time, the steak is an entrecôte also called rib eye, or scotch fillet (in Australia), pan-fried rare (\"\"saignant\"\"—literally \"bloody\"), in a pan reduction sauce, although hollandaise or béarnaise sauce are not uncommon, served with deep-fried potatoes (French fries).\n\nFrancophilia led to its generalization to the Portuguese-speaking world, where it is called or , especially in Brazil, where the sauce is usually just onion rings cooked and fried in the steak's own juice and frying oil, being the most popular dish to go aside rice and beans. It is also very popular in the Spanish-speaking world.\n\n\"Steak-frites\" is the subject of a semiotic analysis by the French cultural theorist Roland Barthes in his 1957 work \"Mythologies\".\n\n"}
{"id": "18022338", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18022338", "title": "Lampreado", "text": "Lampreado\n\nLampreado, also known as Lambreado or “Payaguá Mascada”, is a dish typical of the cuisine of Paraguay, that has a high nutritional value. \n\nThis is a delicious fried cake which base is one of the most characteristic features of culinary taste of Northeast of Paraguay: cassava (cassava Manihot = Manihot utilísima, \"family plant of Euphorbiaceae which roots are edible and for its high content of starch used to produce a flour which is high in protein).\n\nWhile the word \"Lambreado\" is a degeneration of the correct \"Lampreado\" there is little data about the origin of the name of this fried cake made of cassava, known in Paraguay as mandioca, and beef. \n\nIn Paraguay, a Castilian-Guarani bilingual country, and in Northeastern Argentine (where the Guarani language is also spoken) it is also called \"payaguá mascada\", an allusion to one of the tribes of the Guarani people (\"payaguáes\") who populated the Paraguayan geography in pre-Columbian times.\n\nThere are several varieties of \"Lampreado.\" The more traditional ingredients are as follows: cassava/mandioca, boiled and ground beef, garlic, onion, salt, oil and breadcrumbs. \n\nIn other varieties that are heavier on the stomach (but which according to many are tastier), pella or pork fat is used, and the starch and cassava are mixed with raw meat.\n\nThe preparation process is simple. The cassava is peeled and cooked in salted water until it is reasonably soft but not too soft. It is then mashed and mixed with ground beef, garlic and onions previously fried in oil, and salt and breadcrumbs. \n\nWith this mixture, you get “small cakes”, or more properly \"tortillas” which are fried in oil. \n\nTo reduce its caloric value and its heaviness it's recommended that you serve the tortillas with a mixed vegetable salad.\n\nThe Lampreado can be kept for several days, and it is ideal for the \"avio\" (definition taken from the Royal Academy of Spanish Language: \"Among pastors and country people, the provision taken to feed the herders for as long as it takes them to return to town or the farmhouse\"), also provisions taken by travelers and \"troperos\" (mainly cattle drivers) to eat during their journey. \n\nIn the area of the department of Misiones, Paraguay, it's called \"Lambreado\", what elsewhere is known by the name of \"marinera\", made with either beef or chicken. \n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "18023623", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18023623", "title": "Red Bull Simply Cola", "text": "Red Bull Simply Cola\n\nRed Bull Simply Cola is a beverage from Red Bull GmbH, makers of the energy drink Red Bull. The cola, which contains natural flavoring and caffeine, was introduced in 2008 in several countries.\n\nRed Bull Simply Cola is flavored with plant extracts, including galangal, vanilla, mustard seed, lime, kola nut, cocoa, liquorice, cinnamon, lemon, ginger, coca leaf, orange, corn mint, pine, cardamom, mace, clove, and lemon juice concentrate. It also contains caffeine from coffee beans; at 45 milligrams per 355ml (12-ounce) can, the caffeine level is regulated by the FDA, it contains more than Coca-Cola (34 mg) or Pepsi-Cola (37.5 mg), but less than Diet Coke (47 mg) or Mountain Dew (54 mg). The cola contains significantly less caffeine than Red Bull's eponymous energy drink (80 mg per 250 mL). The drink contains sugar and caramel color and lacks the phosphoric acid and high fructose corn syrup used in some other colas.\n\nIn 2008, the year of its release, Red Bull Simply Cola was available in Austria, Azerbaijan, Czech Republic, Croatia, Egypt, Switzerland, Netherlands, Spain, Poland, Germany, Bulgaria, Belgium, Ireland, Italy, India, Thailand, Romania, Hungary, Russia, Slovakia, New Zealand, Mexico, United Kingdom and the United States.\n\nRed Bull Simply Cola is packaged in 250 ml (8.4 fl. oz.) and 355 ml (12 fl. oz.) cans. The larger cans are sold both individually and in 4-packs.\n\nRed Bull discontinued distribution of Red Bull Simply Cola in the USA in late July 2011 to focus on the core markets Austria and Germany.\n\nIn May 2009, food regulators from Germany discovered trace amounts of cocaine from coca leaf extracts in Red Bull Simply Cola, Pepsi One, and Diet Coke. Red Bull GmbH responded by insisting that only de-cocainised coca leaf extracts are used in the production of Red Bull Cola. The amounts in question are minute, around 0.13 micrograms of cocaine in a can of Red Bull Cola, so about 100,000 liters of the cola would need to be consumed for the cocaine to be harmful, according to Bernhard Hoffman, a food scientist for North Rhine-Westphalia who conducted the Red Bull study. Despite this, the drink was ordered off the shelves in the German states of Hesse, North Rhine-Westphalia, Thuringia and Rhineland-Palatinate. After the \"German Institute for Risk Assessment\" declared the product safe in a study, the drink was put back on sale from 24 August 2009 onwards.\n\nAfter the news of the German ban, Taiwan confiscated 18,000 cans of Red Bull Energy Drink, but acknowledged the mistake later.\n\n"}
{"id": "18038984", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18038984", "title": "Baeksuk", "text": "Baeksuk\n\nBaeksuk () is a Korean culinary term referring to dishes made by boiling or steaming meat or fish to be cooked thoroughly without seasonings. \"Baeksuk\" is made with chicken or pheasant with plenty of water for several hours. However, the term generally indicates \"dakbaeksuk\" (닭백숙, chicken \"baeksuk\"), or chicken stew, whose recipe and ingredients are similar to \"samgyetang\". While \"samgyetang\" is made with ginseng, various herbs, chestnuts, and jujubes, \"dakbaeksuk\" consists of simpler ingredients, such as chicken, water, and garlic. The chicken can be stuffed with glutinous rice.\n\nWhen the cooking is finished, salt and sliced Welsh onions (\"daepa\", 대파) are added to the diner's bowl according to taste. If the \"baesuk\" is not stuffed with glutinous rice, it is usually eaten with cooked rice. It is often seen as a simpler and cheaper variant of \"samgyetang\". Sometimes it is mistakenly used as another word for \"samgyetang\".\n\nThe \"dak hanmari\" (닭한마리) is a popular South Korean dish to have developed from \"baeksuk\", which is said to originate in Dongdaemun area, Seoul since the 1960s. The dish literally means \"a whole chicken\" in Korean because diners can have several types of food altogether from a chicken; chicken flesh, its rich soup, \"kalguksu\", potatoes, and \"garaetteok\" (cylinder-shaped rice cake). It can be eaten with a clear broth just like \"baeksuk\", or seasoned with \"gochujang\" (chili pepper paste) based sauce.\n\n"}
{"id": "18058772", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18058772", "title": "Bugak", "text": "Bugak\n\nBugak () is a variety of vegetarian \"twigim\" (deep-fried dish) in Korean cuisine. It is made by deep frying dried vegetables or seaweed coated with \"chapssal-pul\" (; glutinous rice paste) and then drying them again. It is eaten as \"banchan\" (accompaniment to cooked rice) or \"anju\" (accompaniment to alcoholic beverages). Common ingredients are green chili peppers, perilla leaves, inflorescence, camellia leaves, chrysanthemum leaves, burdock leaves, tree of heaven shoots, potatoes, \"gim\" (laver), and \"dasima\" (kelp). Vegetable oils such as perilla oil or soybean oil are typically used for frying.\n\n\"Bugak\" is a relatively rare culinary technique in Korean cuisine, along with \"dasima twigak\" (; deep fried vegetables without coating). It is often associated with Korean temple cuisine.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "18062515", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18062515", "title": "Old Tom gin", "text": "Old Tom gin\n\nOld Tom Gin (or Tom Gin or Old Tom) is a gin recipe popular in 18th-century England. In modern times, it became rare but has experienced a resurgence in the \"Craft Cocktail\" movement. It is slightly sweeter than London Dry, but slightly drier than the Dutch Jenever, thus is sometimes called \"the missing link\".\n\nThe name Old Tom Gin purportedly came from wooden plaques shaped like a black cat (an \"Old Tom\") mounted on the outside wall of some pubs above a public walkway in 18th-century England. Owing to the Gin Craze, the British government tried to stem the flow of gin with prohibitive taxes and licensing, which drove the scene underground. Under the cat's paw sign was a slot to put money in and a lead tube. From the tube would come a shot of gin, poured by the bartender inside the pub.\n\nOld Tom Gin was formerly made under licence by a variety of distillers around the world; however, one was recently relaunched by Hayman's distillery based on an original recipe. Since then a number of other companies have followed suit, such as: Booth's; Secret Treasures; The Liberty Distillery; Tanqueray; Langley's; Jensens; Ransom; Master Of Malt; The Dorchester Hotel and The London Distillery Company Ltd. \n\nAn Old Tom Gin made by J. Wray and Nephew Ltd. of Jamaica is also commonly found on the market, although the island is better known for rum.\n\nOld Tom Gin is specified for Jerry Thomas' cocktail called the Martinez in his 1887 \"Bartender's Guide, How to Mix All Kinds of Plain and Fancy Drinks\". The first record of it being used in the Tom Collins cocktail was the 1891 book, \"The Flowing Bowl: When and What to Drink.\"\n\n"}
{"id": "18063548", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18063548", "title": "Jook-sing noodles", "text": "Jook-sing noodles\n\nJook-sing noodles is a rare type of Cantonese noodle found in some parts of Hong Kong, Macau, and some parts of Canton in Guangdong province, China.\n\nThe noodle is made with eggs, traditionally made with duck egg, and is considered one of the rarer noodles in existence. Historically the chef rides a bamboo log to press the eggs, flour, and other ingredients together. As of 2008 in Hong Kong, only a few restaurants are left that make the noodles in the traditional manner.\n\nOne of the noodle's most popular combinations in a dish is jook-sing wonton noodles (竹昇雲吞麵).\n"}
{"id": "18067981", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18067981", "title": "Baobing", "text": "Baobing\n\nBaobing (), also known by its Taiwanese Hokkien name Tsuabing (), is a shaved ice dessert found in Taiwan. It is especially popular during the summer. Baobing was eaten in China as early as the seventh century AD.\n\nThe dessert consists of a large mound of ice shavings with various toppings on top. A wide variety toppings exist, but the most common ones include sugar water, condensed milk, adzuki beans, mung beans, and tapioca balls. Fruit are also used according to the season. Mango baobing is typically only available in the summer, while strawberry baobing is available in the winter.\n\nTraditionally, these shavings were created by hand using a large mallet to crush ice or a blade to shave ice. Now, most stores use machines, which result in finer, thinner ice shavings.\n\n"}
{"id": "18071247", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18071247", "title": "Carbonade flamande", "text": "Carbonade flamande\n\nCarbonade flamande, alternatively spelt carbonnade or \"à la flamande\" (in Dutch stoofkarbonade (often plural: stoofkarbonaden or stoofkarbonades), Vlaamse karbonade (often plural: Vlaamse karbonaden or Vlaamse karbonades), stoverij or stoofvlees) (in English, Flemish Stew) is a traditional Belgian, French Flemish, Northern Brabantian and Zeelandic Flemish sweet-sour beef (or pork) and onion stew made with beer, and seasoned with thyme, bay leaves and mustard. Mushrooms or spiced bread can also be added. The term carbonade may also refer to a dish of grilled pork loin and certain beef stews cooked with red wine such as beef bourguignon in the east of France, but is more commonly associated with the Belgian dish.\n\nThe type of beer used is important, and traditionally an Oud bruin (Old Brown Beer), Brune Abbey beer or Flanders red is the beer of choice with a somewhat bitter-sour flavour. In addition to this and to enhance the sweet-sour flavour, just before serving, it has a small amount of cider or wine vinegar and either brown sugar or red currant jelly stirred in.\n\nIt is often accompanied by french fries, boiled potatoes or stoemp. It is widely available in restaurants and friteries in Belgium and the Netherlands.\n\n"}
{"id": "18091263", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18091263", "title": "Mieum (food)", "text": "Mieum (food)\n\nMieum () is a thin, strained gruel made from white rice, white glutinous rice, foxtail millet, or glutinous foxtail millet. It is often used in liquid diet for patients and for recently weaned children. A thinner \"mieum\", made from rice water or mixed with powdered milk, is sometimes used as a breast milk substitute for younger babies.\nRice or foxtail millet is soaked for at least 2 hours before being drained and boiled, usually at a ratio of 1 part grain to 10 parts water (1:10). It is simmered until sodden and mushy, then strained through a double sieve. The Sieved gruel is then warmed again and served with two small dishes of salt and \"cheongjang\" (clear soup soy sauce).\n\n\"Sok-mieum\" () is a \"mieum\" made with jujube, chestnut, and gingseng. Thinly sliced ginseng is simmered for an hour, and the water is used to make \"sok-mieum\". Glutinous rice or glutinous foxtail millet, jujube, and chestnut is prepared in the same way: Boiling until mushy and double sieving. Glutinous rice-based \"sok-mieum\" is seasoned with sugar, while glutinous foxtail millet-based \"sok-mieum\" is seasoned with salt before being served.\n\n"}
{"id": "18092136", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18092136", "title": "Pira caldo", "text": "Pira caldo\n\nPira caldo is a fish soup that is part of the traditional cuisine of Paraguay. The Guarani word \"Pira\" means \"fish\".\n\nThe soup is very high in calorie content and in protein. This has its origins in the circumstances after the Paraguayan War (1864 to 1870). The war made food scarce, so daily meals were limited and had to be calorie and nutrient dense.\n\nMargarita Miro Ibars, a scholar of Paraguayan culinary anthropology, says \"… all Guarani groups were major consumers of fish and prepared a fish meal. Fish was the basic food protein, along with game hens similar to those of Spain and abundant game animals… \"\n\nTraditionally the fish used for pira caldo are mainly smaller river fish such as the \"mandi'y\" and \"tare'y\", from the armored catfish family. Other ingredients include fat, onion, tomatoes, green or red bell peppers, parsley, pepper, spices, and salt.\n\nThe pira caldo as most popularly prepared begins with frying the vegetables in a little beef or pork fat. Then boiled water and the fish are added with salt and spices. When the fish is cooked and the soup is thick, some chopped chili pepper is added.\n\nAs pira caldo is a widespread dish, there are a number of variations. One of them which constitutes a rich source of protein is prepared by running the cooked fish through a small mill. This method of preparation avoids the problem of small children choking on the bones.\n\n"}
{"id": "18092150", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18092150", "title": "Overhand (boxing)", "text": "Overhand (boxing)\n\nAn overhand (or \"overcut\" or \"drop\") is a semi-circular and vertical punch thrown with the rear hand. It is usually employed when the opponent is bobbing or slipping. The strategic utility of the drop relying on body weight can deliver a great deal of power.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "18095363", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18095363", "title": "Pinangat na isda", "text": "Pinangat na isda\n\nPinangat na isda, also called pangat na isda, is a Filipino dish from Southern Luzon consisting of fish and tomatoes stewed in a broth soured with fruits like calamansi, bilimbi, tamarind, or santol. It can also be used to cook shrimp. It is similar to \"sinigang\", but it is not as tart.\n\n\"Pinangat na isda\" may also sometimes be referred to as \"paksiw\", a related but different dish which primarily use vinegar to sour the broth. \"Pinangat na isda\" is also commonly confused with \"laing\" (also called \"pinangat na laing\" or \"pinangat na gabi\"), a Bicolano dish also known simply as \"pinangat\". But they are different dishes.\n\n"}
{"id": "18107778", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18107778", "title": "Royal Tru", "text": "Royal Tru\n\nRoyal Tru (often referred to simply as Royal) is a carbonated fruit-flavored soft drink brand owned by The Coca-Cola Company that is only available in the Philippines. The brand was introduced in 1922 by the original San Miguel Brewery. Since being acquired by Coca-Cola's Philippine unit in 2007, the brand has become the Philippine counterpart of Coca-Cola's Fanta brand.\n\nThe Royal brand was first introduced in 1922 by the original San Miguel Brewery as its first non-alcoholic, carbonated beverage. In 1927, San Miguel became the first international bottler of Coca-Cola. The Royal brand became best associated with its orange-flavored soft drink, Royal Tru-Orange.\n\nIn 1981, San Miguel spun off its soft drink business (its Coca-Cola franchise and the manufacture of Royal beverages) to a new company known as Coca-Cola Bottlers Philippines, Inc. (CCBPI), a joint-venture with The Coca-Cola Company. The brand continued to be owned by San Miguel until 2007, when San Miguel sold the rights to the brand along with its entire interest in CCBPI to The Coca-Cola Company. CCBPI was renamed Coca-Cola FEMSA Philippines, Inc. since January 2013 after the entry of Mexico-based Coca-Cola FEMSA S.A. de C.V.\n\n\n\nThe beverage targets teenagers as its consumers. The product was available during the 1970s in single-serve bottles and contained orange \"pulp bits\" (pulp) \"from California Valencia oranges\".\n\nWhen San Miguel Corporation became one of the founding members of the Philippine Basketball Association in 1975, its basketball franchise played under the name \"Royal Tru-Orange\" from 1975 to 1980.\n\nRoyal Tru-Orange gained much attention in the mid-1980's following the restoration of democracy in the Philippines, after its logo and formulation (now without the orange pulp) were changed through an advertising campaign that starred teen model RJ Ledesma (playing the role of \"Joey\"). The first television advertisement in the series, wherein Joey was being egged on by friends to introduce himself to a girl named Jenny, was directed by noted film director Lino Brocka.\n\n\nRoyal Tru-Orange was one of 300 products of the Philippines barred by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration in 2004 from entering the United States due to \"failure to meet its requirements.\n"}
{"id": "18108342", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18108342", "title": "Gamja-jeon", "text": "Gamja-jeon\n\nGamja-jeon () or potato pancakes is a variety of \"jeon\", or Korean style pancake, made by pan-frying finely grated potato on a frying pan with any type of vegetable oil until golden brown.\n\nPotatoes may have been introduced in Korea either through the China–North Korea border at Tumen in 1824, or by the German missionary Karl Gützlaff via sea in 1832. The tubers have been cultivated mainly in the hills and mountain ranges of Gangwon Province, with \"gamjajeon\" becoming a specialty of that region. \"Gamjajeon\" is traditionally made with only potato, salt, and oil.\n\nAccording to taste, the grated potato may be supplemented with finely shredded potatoes, carrots, onions or scallions, sliced mushrooms, or garlic chives, which adds color and crunchy texture to the dish. \"Gamjajeon\" can also be garnished with shredded fresh red and green chili pepper. It is served with a dipping sauce called \"choganjang\" (초간장), made of soy sauce and vinegar.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "18114895", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18114895", "title": "Khushka Rice", "text": "Khushka Rice\n\nKhushka, kuska, or Khusqa is a rice dish of primarily South Asian origin made with spices, rice (usually basmati) and ghee. It's a lunch dish, primarily served with Kurma or Korma and is very popular in Southern India. \n\nThe spices and condiments used in Khushka may include but are not limited to: cardamom, cinnamon, bay leaves, coriander and mint leaves, apart from ghee, ginger, onions. \nThe dish retains the white color of rice even with the light seasoning with spices. \nThe dish is served with korma, curry, dahi chutney or Raita.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "18117416", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18117416", "title": "Brânză de burduf", "text": "Brânză de burduf\n\nBrânză de burduf (also known as \"Brânză frământată\" ()) is a salty type of Romanian cheese, made with sheep (or occasionally buffalo) milk. It has a strong flavour and slightly soft in texture. \n\nTo obtain it, sweet caş is cut into small pieces, salted and then hand-mixed in a large wooden bowl. The mixture is then placed in a sheep’s stomach, or into a sheep’s skin that has been carefully cleaned and sawed on the edges, or in a tube made of pine bark. The cheese can be consumed even if kept for a long time in a sheep’s stomach or in a sheep’s skin. If kept in pine bark, the cheese gets a specific pine resin flavour. \n\nThe cheese is specific to different areas from the historical regions of Transylvania, Moldavia and Wallachia (including assortments known as: \"Brânză în coajă de brad\" (Cheese in fir shell), \"Brânză de putină\", \"Cremă Focșani\", \"Brânză Moldova\", \"Brânză Dorna\", \"Brânză Luduș\", \"Brânză Bistrița\", \"Brânză Săveni\" or \"Brânză Botoșana\").\n\n"}
{"id": "18118466", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18118466", "title": "Mortadella sandwich", "text": "Mortadella sandwich\n\nA mortadella sandwich is any sandwich using mortadella, a large Italian sausage, and is a very popular sandwich in Brazil especially São Paulo. The sandwich is made from nearly a half of a pound of mortadella sausage, Provolone cheese, sourdough bread, mayonnaise and Dijon mustard.\n\n"}
{"id": "18135745", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18135745", "title": "Marie Rose sauce", "text": "Marie Rose sauce\n\nMarie Rose sauce (known in some areas as cocktail sauce or seafood sauce) is a British condiment often made from a blend of tomatoes, mayonnaise, Worcestershire sauce, lemon juice and black pepper. A simpler version can be made by merely mixing tomato ketchup with mayonnaise. The sauce, as well as cocktail sauce, were invented in the 1960s by British cook Fanny Cradock.\n\nIt is often accompanied with seafood, and prawns in particular.\n\nIn the United States, a similar sauce, fry sauce, is sometimes served with french fries. Another similar sauce called Thousand Island dressing is popular in the United States and Canada. The Thousand Island dressing recipe reputedly originated from the Thousand Islands between the state of New York and the province of Ontario. In Argentina, salsa golf is a similar sauce created in the 1920s at a golf course, hence the name.\n\nIn Ireland, Marie Rose sauce () refers primarily to just ketchup and mayonnaise, and often salt and pepper. Marie Rose sauce in chip shops is usually known as \"burger sauce\", though there are many names in use. However, the above British versions are also used in Ireland. The name used is dependent on where it is being served (e.g. chip shop) and what the sauce is being accompanied with (such as chips or salad). More formal recipes may also incorporate ingredients such as horseradish, herbs, and a splash of Irish brandy.\n\nSome restaurants may top or accompany Marie Rose sauce with Irish cheddar cheese.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "18138128", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18138128", "title": "Chunche", "text": "Chunche\n\nChunche (Uyghur:چۈنچە, Чунчә; Chinese: 晾房, 阴房) is a Uyghur word that refers to a kind of building used to make raisins in Turpan, Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous Region, China. The building has a dark interior, and the walls are covered with a large number of holes to allow wind to pass through and assist in the drying process through evaporation. Chunches are usually built in high, windy, areas due to the need for the wind.\n\nThese structures have long attracted attention of visitors to Turpan. The 19th-century Russian traveler, Grigory Grumm-Grzhimaylo, wrote of Turpan:\n\nTurfan is famous for its raisins, which one can deem to be the best in the world. They are dried in drying houses of a completely peculiar type.\nIn Turpan, raisins are primarily produced from seedless white grapes.\nThe drying process takes about 40 days. Grapes that have been dried in a drying house (the \"air-dried\" kind) usually appear green or yellow, because of the shade, while grapes dried under direct sun appear dark.\n\nSome raisin producers are reported to buy grapes elsewhere (e.g. in Hami) and bring them to Turpan to dry in the local \"chunche\", as this drying method is believed to produce a superior product.\n\nFor 2009/2010, China's annual raisin production was forecasted by international expert at 155,000 metric tons (the largest in the world), of which 75% would come from Turpan.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "18170749", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18170749", "title": "Ssam", "text": "Ssam\n\n', sometimes also transliterated as ', meaning \"wrapped\", refers to a dish in Korean cuisine in which, usually, leafy vegetables are used to wrap a piece of meat such as pork or other filling. It is often accompanied by a condiment known as and can also be topped with raw or cooked garlic, onion, green pepper, or a (small side dish) such as kimchi. is usually bite-sized to avoid spilling out the fillings.\n\nAccording to the book of customs, , was eaten by the women of the Goryeo era who had been taken as maids or ladies of the court to Mongol's Yuan Dynasty, and by the end of the Joseon era, had become an established seasonal dish. On the day of \"Daeboreum\", the that was eaten on that holiday was called (, good fortune ).\n\nVarious vegetables are used as ingredients such as lettuce, cabbage, bean leaves, and pumpkin leaves, which are used either raw or blanched. Seaweed such as (sea mustard seaweed) and (dried laver) are also used. can be used to refer to dishes using beef tongue, roe, pork, clams, or sea cucumbers wrapped and cooked in eggs.\n\n\nSpecific types:\n\n"}
{"id": "18170804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18170804", "title": "Bossam", "text": "Bossam\n\nBossam () is a pork dish in Korean cuisine. It usually consists of belly pork that is boiled in spices and thinly sliced. The meat is served with side dishes such as spicy radish salad, sliced raw garlic, \"ssamjang\" (wrap sauce), \"saeu-jeot\" (salted shrimp), kimchi, and \"ssam\" (wrap) vegetables such as lettuce, \"kkaennip\" (perilla leaves), and inner leaves of a napa cabbage.\n\n\"Bossam\" is a popular dish in Korea, often served as \"anju\" (food accompanying alcoholic drinks). To eat, the meat and side dishes are wrapped together in \"ssam\" vegetables, hence the literal meaning of \"bossam\": \"wrapped\" or \"packaged\".\n\n\"Bossam\" is traditionally linked with the process of \"gimjang\", during which large quantities of kimchi are prepared for winters. To ensure the commitment of the workers during this labor-intensive process, \"yangban\" (scholar-gentry of the Joseon era) would deliver a pig for a feast. The workers would enjoy boiled pork with some of their newly made kimchi, which, being early in the fermentation process, was a fresh and crispy compliment to the soft pork of \"bossam\".\n\nAlthough beef can also be used, pork is preferred for \"bossam\". Pork shoulder is the most commonly used cut, but fattier cuts such as pork belly and chewier cuts such as pork hand can also be used. The meat is tied with kitchen twine to hold its shape, and boiled in a broth that contains star anise, ginger, white part and root of scallion, garlic, \"doenjang\" (soybean paste), coffee powder, tea leaves, and so on, to reduce the gaminess. When cooked, it is rinsed with cold water, untied, and pressed lightly in a cotton cloth to maintain its shape. When cooled, the meat is sliced into pieces of about and served with varieties of side dishes, typically including spicy radish salad similar to the kimchi filling, inner leaves of napa cabbages, and freshly made \"baechu-kimchi\" (napa cabbage kimchi).\n\nIf the meat is served with fresh raw oyster, the dish is called \"gul-bossam\" (; \"oyster \"bossam\"\").\n\n"}
{"id": "18192727", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18192727", "title": "Galão", "text": "Galão\n\nGalão () is a hot drink from Portugal made of espresso and foamed milk. Similar to caffè latte or café au lait, it consists of about one quarter coffee and three quarters foamed milk. It is served in a tall glass, as opposed to the smaller garoto that is served in a demitasse. When the proportion is 1:1 it is called \"meia de leite\" (half of milk) and it comes in a cup.\n\n"}
{"id": "18193736", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18193736", "title": "Cappy (juice)", "text": "Cappy (juice)\n\nCappy is a fruit juice and fruit-flavored soft drink brand in over 25 countries, in Europe, Africa and Asia, now owned by The Coca-Cola Company.\n\nA new juice variant called Cappy Selectii was introduced in 2003 in response to local demand for premium products and natural flavours. It contains more than 99 per cent natural juice and no added sugar. Cappy Selectii is known as Cappy Juice in some countries. In July 2008 The Coca-Cola Company launched in Poland new noncarbonated beverage Cappy Ice Fruit.\n\nApple, Apple Apricot Orange, Apple Mint, Apple Peach, Apple Pear, Apricot, Cherry, Citrus Blend, Citrus Orange, Currant, Exotic, Fruit Punch, Grape, Grapefruit, Grapefruit Orange, Grapefruit and Lychee, Kiwi Lemon, Lemon, Multivitamin, Nectarine, Orange, Orange Pineapple, Orange Tangerine, Orange Tangerine Lemon, Peach, Pear, Pineapple, Red Fruits, Sour Cherry, Strawberry, Tomato, and Watermelon.\n\nCappy juices are available in Albania, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bosnia & Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Estonia, Georgia, Hungary, Italy, Kazakhstan, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Moldova, North Macedonia, Palestinian Authority, Poland, Romania, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Sudan, Nigeria, Turkey, Egypt, Pakistan and Morocco .\n\n\n"}
{"id": "18287682", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18287682", "title": "Chunchullo", "text": "Chunchullo\n\nChinchulín is beef small intestine, which may be grilled or fried. It is consumed in many Latin American countries.\n\nIt is grilled over wood or charcoal. In Colombia, Argentina, Paraguay, Uruguay and Chile however, it is usually roasted. Although it requires long cooking it is usually the first dish served in a Paraguayan, Uruguayan and Argentinian \"asado\".\n\nThey are presented in the form of a braid.\n\nKnown as chinchulín and are typically roasted. The large intestine, in Argentina, is called \"Tripa Gorda\" (Big Gut) or torch and cooked similarly, except that they are usually washed inside and filled with the same filling for sausages.\n\nKnown as Chunchules.\n\nDepending on the region it can be called Chunchullo, Chunchulla, Chinchurria or Chunchurria. Usually eaten fresh.\n\nIn Ecuador it is known as \"tripa mishqui\". It's roasted, and sometimes eaten with boiled potatoes or mote.\n\nIn Venezuela it is known as Chinchurria and is roasted.\n\nIn Peru this meal has a Creole term \"choncholi\" : prepared steamed and then roasted on a grill, food native of people from Angola, who were based in the south of the country to work in the cotton fields and sugar in the province of Ica, south of Lima. It was a typical food of the black population of Peru but now, like the kebabs they are consumed at every social level.\n\nIn southern Mexico, the first portion of the small intestine of the cow (first 3–4 meters) is known as \"tripa de leche\" (translates to \"gut of milk\"). This is washed thoroughly with tap water, braided and boiled in a pressure cooker for about 1 hour, because it is very hard. Later, it's fried with garlic and onions and served on fresh tortillas, whole or chopped into cubes, served with hot salsa.\n\n"}
{"id": "18301136", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18301136", "title": "Braunton Canal", "text": "Braunton Canal\n\nThe Braunton Canal is a cut made to straighten the course of the upper section of the River Caen, known as Braunton Pill, and to provide a new quay for the village of Braunton in North Devon, England. It crosses an area known as Braunton Marsh, which was the subject of Enclosure Acts in the early 19th Century, and was the only one of several schemes which was actually constructed.\n\nBefore 1808, the area around Braunton, Velator, Wrafton and South Burrow was an extensive salt marsh. In that year, the Board of Agriculture sent Charles Vancouver to investigate the marsh, and his report recommended that it should be enclosed and reclaimed. This met with local approval, and James Green was appointed as engineer for the drainage scheme. Green commissioned John Pascoe to produce a survey and map (held by the Devon Record Office), which outlined two schemes. The first involved an embankment from the mouth of Braunton Pill to Bench Hill, with a canal from the Pill via Wrafton and the edge of Velator Marsh to some lime kilns near what is now Velator Quay. There were concerns about the cost of the project, and objections to parts of the first scheme from the Bassett Estate, and so it was the second scheme that formed the basis for the Act of Parliament obtained on 25 May 1811, for \"the Inclosing, Draining, and Embanking Lands in Braunton, in the County of Devon.\"\n\nAlthough construction started, and good progress was made, the details appear to have been worked out as the scheme progressed. The scheme was financed by passing the costs on to local farmers and landowners, and by the sale of plots of land once the scheme was complete. The Marsh Commissioners, who had overall responsibility for the scheme, received a letter from 20 farmers objecting to the construction of a lock, which Green had proposed to provide access to the interior of the marsh, and so the lock was not built.\n\nGreen also made a proposal for the drainage of Braunton Mere, and an agreement was concluded on 10 September 1814 to carry out this work for £765. The task was completed ahead of schedule, with Green being complemented for the \"\"good, workmanlike manner\"\" in which the work had been conducted.\n\nAlthough the original plans for the enclosure of the marsh included the construction of a canal, it was not built, but there remained an intent to develop a quay on Braunton Pill, to replace the quay at Wrafton. To this end, three plots of land were bought in the 1840s, but no further progress was made, until the Bassett Estate was sold to Mr William Williams in 1852. Williams proposed a grand plan to straighten Braunton Pill, and to enclose further fringes of land, together with the area known as Horsey Island, a barren sandbank the enclosing of which Vancouver had suggested was doomed to failure in his original report of 1808. The work was to be financed by Williams, and the Marsh Inspectors, who had taken over responsibility for the marsh once the original enclosure had been completed, gave their approval.\n\nDespite the concerns of the engineer Nicholas Whiteley about the likely hazards of trying to reclaim Horsey Island, the scheme went ahead, with two schemes being put out to tender, one for embankments around Horsey Island and the other for the construction of the new cut and the embankments on Braunton Pill. Calls for subcontractors, 200 navvies and a haulier to move 60,000 yards of stone from Braunton Down and other quarries were made in October 1854. There were some financial difficulties, and vandalism on the Heanton embankment in 1855. The upper section of the new cut was constructed through clay, but the lower section was though sand, which provided significant difficulties. The channel was lined with clay, with the base covered in gravel, and pumps were required to operate continuously to enable the work to proceed. Despite the problems, the works were finished within the three-year timescale, and costs of £13,394 were slightly under the budget price.\n\nMr Williams also financed the new quay at Velator, which opened around 1870. The quay was sufficient for ships of up to 130 tons, and continued to be used for unloading gravel until the 1960s. At the same time as the opening of the quay, repairs were required to some of the embankments on the new cut, which were subsiding as a result of the material on which they were constructed. In 1910, the North Devon Coast was hit by severe storms, and the embankments around Horsey Island were breached in several places. A breach also occurred in the walls of the new cut, with local newspapers describing a boat passing through the breach onto the marsh, and back out again when the tide turned, but few other details are known, as contemporary sources were more concerned with the task of repairing the embankments around Horsey Island.\n\nVelator Quay and the surrounding area is used as a mooring for small boats. In 2006 Braunton council blocked vehicular access to the quay as it was found to be in danger of collapse. An engineering survey was conducted on the quay in 2010, by consultants Bolgar Sykes, as the council were hoping to make it more of an amenity. The survey revealed several possible options for repair, ranging in cost from £80,000 to £400,000. The limited budget available to the council for such work meant that only basic repairs were considered. A subsequent report by Peter Lord, one of the parish counsellors, recommended that demolition of the quay would be the best long-term option, with the provision of a slipway to assist boat owners. The quay is widely held to be a free port, this status having been awarded to Barnstaple seamen who fought against the Spanish Armada. However, the report highlighted the fact that this is likely to be just a local legend, as the quay was not constructed until 300 years after the event.\n\nBelow Braunton, the original course of the River Caen remains as isolated ponds on the inland side of the embankments: these ponds are an important habitat for birds.\n\n"}
{"id": "18304858", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18304858", "title": "Cucurucho", "text": "Cucurucho\n\nCucurucho is a local delicacy of the city of Baracoa in eastern Cuba. Wrapped in a cone-shaped palm leaf (hence the name: \"cucurucho\" - Spanish for cone or cornet), it is a mix of coconut, sugar and other ingredients such as orange, guava and pineapple.\n\n"}
{"id": "18317856", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18317856", "title": "Planter's Punch", "text": "Planter's Punch\n\nPlanter's Punch is an IBA Official Cocktail made of dark rum, several juices, grenadine syrup, sugar syrup, and Angostura bitters.\n\nThe cocktail has been said to have originated at the Planters Hotel in Charleston, South Carolina. The September 1878 issue of the London magazine \"Fun\" listed the recipe as follows:\n\n<poem>A wine-glass with lemon juice fill,\nOf sugar the same glass fill twice\nThen rub them together until\nThe mixture looks smooth, soft, and nice.\n\nOf rum then three wine glasses add,\nAnd four of cold water please take. A\nDrink then you'll have that's not bad—\nAt least, so they say in Jamaica.</poem>\n"}
{"id": "18324426", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18324426", "title": "Fue", "text": "Fue\n\n\"Fue\" are traditionally broken up into two basic categories – the transverse flute and the end-blown flute. Transverse flutes are held to the side, with the musician blowing across a hole near one end; end-blown flutes are held vertically and the musician blows into one end. \n\nThe earliest \"fue\" may have developed from pitch pipes called \"paixiao\" in Chinese. The \"gabachi\" instruments eventually made its way over to Japan from China in the fifth century, \n\nSoon after the introduction of \"fue\" instruments, members of the Fuke sect of Zen Buddhism made normal use of the \"shakuhachi\". These \"priests of nothingness\" viewed the instruments as spiritual tools, using them for \"suizen\", or \"blowing meditation\". Modern \"fue\" performance may feature a soloist or involve either a chamber or large ensemble of the instruments.\n\nJapanese \"fue\" include many different varieties of Japanese flute, including the following:\n"}
{"id": "18327410", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18327410", "title": "Gulaman", "text": "Gulaman\n\nGulaman, in Filipino cuisine, refers to the bars of dried agar used to make jelly-like desserts. In common usage, it also usually refers to the refreshment \"sago't gulaman\", sometimes referred to as \"samalamig\", sold at roadside stalls and vendors. \n\n\"Gulaman\" is the Filipino culinary use of agar, which is made of processed seaweed, mostly from \"Gelidium corneum\"—one of the most common edible algae. It is usually sold dehydrated and formed into foot-long dry bars which are either plain or coloured. They can also be sold in powder form, such as ZANG Gulaman.\n\n\"Gulaman\" bars are used in the various Filipino refreshments or desserts such as \"sago at gulaman\", \"buko pandan\", agar flan, \"halo-halo\", different varieties of Filipino fruit salads, black \"gulaman\", and red \"gulaman\".\n\nThe term gelatine (or \"jelly\") and \"gulaman\" are used synonymously in the Philippines, although they are very different products. While gelatine is a protein, \"gulaman\" is a plant-derived carbohydrate, made from seaweed. This distinction makes \"gulaman\" suitable for those who may not eat gelatine for religious or cultural reasons, such as Muslims.\n\nGelatine dissolves in hot water but boiling water is necessary to dissolve \"gulaman\". Unlike gelatine which sets at refrigerator temperature, \"gulaman\" sets at room temperature. While gelatine can melt at room temperature, it is uniquely thermo-reversible to its previous shape and form.\n\n"}
{"id": "18329036", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18329036", "title": "Rainbow sherbet", "text": "Rainbow sherbet\n\nRainbow sherbet is a frozen dessert made with the foundations in ice cream, milk and sugar; however, sherbet also contains a frozen mixture of sweetened fruit juice, water, which may contain milk, egg whites and/or gelatin, orange, raspberry, lime, lemon, or pineapple flavors. Sherbet is traditionally eaten between courses of a meal, as it helps clean the palate.\n\nIt is said that sherbet, along with ice cream, was made from chilled wines and other juices in the era of Alexander the Great. It was not called ice cream centuries ago, but \"water ices\". Marco Polo brought flavors of water ices to Europe from the Far East. Catherine de Medici, crowned queen of France in 1533, brought with her recipes of Italian sherbet. A combination of ice and salt became the most popular use in making the dessert in the 17th century. Frozen desserts found their way to America by the 18th century.\n\nRainbow Sherbet was invented by Emanuel Goren while working at Sealtest Dairies, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, during the early 1950s. He is credited by them in conceptualizing the three nozzle design to fill the containers simultaneously with 3 flavors, thus creating the \"Rainbow\" effect of the confection.\n\n"}
{"id": "18371059", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18371059", "title": "Pizza al taglio", "text": "Pizza al taglio\n\nPizza al taglio or pizza al trancio (Italian for pizza by the slice — literally \"by the cut\") is a variety of pizza baked in large rectangular trays, and generally sold in rectangular or square slices by weight, with prices marked per kilogram or per 100 grams. This type of pizza was invented in Rome, Italy, and is common throughout Italy. Many variations and styles of pizza al taglio exist, and the dish is available in other areas of the world in addition to Italy.\n\nIn the most traditional Italian pizza al taglio shops, such as \"pizzerie\" (singular \"pizzeria\") and bakeries, the pizza is often cooked in a wood-fired oven. In today's establishments, electric ovens are also often used. The rectangular pizza shape makes it easier to cut and divide the pizza to the buyer's desire, which is often distinguished by weight. The dish is often eaten as a casual, takeaway dish that is eaten outside of restaurants where it is served, such as in a piazza. \n\nThe simplest varieties include \"pizza Margherita\" (tomato sauce, cheese, and basil), \"pizza bianca\" (olive oil, rosemary and garlic), and \"pizza rossa\" (tomato sauce only). Other typical toppings include artichokes, asparagus, eggplant, ground meat and onions, potatoes, prosciutto, salami, sausage, ground truffles, zucchini, olive oil sun-dried tomatoes, arugula, gorgonzola, anchovies, and black olives.\n\nThis style of pizza popular casual food in Argentina and Malta, where for many years it has been a common way for people to grab a quick snack or meal. Pizza al taglio shops are also appearing in the United States. In each country, the style of crusts and toppings may be adapted to suit their own cultures.\n\n"}
{"id": "18407999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18407999", "title": "Doenjang-jjigae", "text": "Doenjang-jjigae\n\nDoenjang-jjigae or soybean paste stew is a rich, silky \"jjigae\" (stew) made with \"doenjang\" (soybean paste) and available ingredients such as vegetables (scallions, aehobak, radishes, potatoes, chili pepper), mushrooms, tofu, seafood (shrimp, clams) and meat (beef, pork). Often, small amount of \"gochujang\" (red chili paste) is added for a hint of heat. It is one of Korea's most-popular \"jjigae\", served from breakfast to late-night. It is heartier, thicker and more pungent compared to \"doenjang-guk\" (soybean paste soup).\n\n"}
{"id": "18409566", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18409566", "title": "Rum Swizzle", "text": "Rum Swizzle\n\nA Rum Swizzle is a rum-based cocktail often called \"Bermuda's national drink\". \"The Royal Gazette\" has referred to it as \"the legendary Sam swizzle...perfect for sharing and irresistible to locals and tourists alike\" In addition to providing the \"swizzle\" portion of the 1933 swizzle stick product name, it has been said that this potent cocktail is \"as much a part of Bermuda Island culture and cuisine as is the Bermuda onion, the vibrant hibiscus, or the graceful Bermuda Longtail.\"\n\nDifferent bartenders have varying interpretations of this drink. One of the older recipes was presented in the 1941 \"Old Mr. Boston De Luxe Official Bartender Guide\". Gosling's Rum, which is based in Bermuda, publishes a recipe with two different rums from their brand line. Rum, fruit juice (often including lime, and orange and pineapple juice), and a flavored sweetener such as falernum or grenadine are the most consistent ingredients, and the drink is generally shaken or stirred with ice.\n\nIcy drink mixtures with rum, first identified as swizzles and later as Rum Swizzles, have been mentioned in literature in a variety of locations since the mid 18th century: Fort Ticonderoga, New York (1760), the Caribbean island of Saint Kitts (1838), Bridgetown, Barbados (1841), Great Britain (1862), Bridgeport, Barbados (1908), and the island of Saint Thomas in the U.S. Virgin Islands (1911). In these earliest versions, the drink typically consisted of one part of rum diluted with five or six parts water (sometimes with additional aromatic ingredients), which was mixed by rotating between the palms of the hands a special forked stick made from a root; another account describes it as spruce beer with added rum and sugar.\n\nIn his 1909 book, \"Beverages, Past and Present: An Historical Sketch of Their Production,\" Brotherhood Winery owner Edward R. Emerson asserted that Rum Swizzles originated on the Caribbean island of Saint Kitts. American naturalist and writer Frederick Albion Ober noted in 1920 that the great drink of the Barbados ice houses was the swizzle, a combination of liquors, sugar, and ice whisked to a froth by a rapidly revolved \"swizzle-stick\" made from the stem of a native plant, perhaps \"Quararibea turbinata\" (the \"swizzlestick tree\") or an allspice bush. \nThe etymology of the word \"swizzle\" is unknown, but it may derive from a similar beverage known as switchel.\n\nRum Swizzles were the drink of choice at what was purportedly the world's first cocktail party held in London, England in 1924 by novelist Alec Waugh. A reference to a (possibly fictitious) \"Green Swizzle\" drink dates to 1925 (see \"Other Swizzles\" below). The Rum Swizzle is also mentioned in Sinclair Lewis's 1925 novel \"Arrowsmith\", which is set in the fictional Caribbean island of St. Hubert. In 1930, the drink was referenced in a book written by Joseph Hergesheimer, which refers to the drink containing Bacardi rum and bitters, as well as a swizzle stick made of sassafras. The Rum Swizzle was also mentioned in the 1931 autobiographical novel \"Half a Loaf\", penned by Sinclair Lewis's former wife Grace Hegger Lewis about their life together.\n\nToday the Rum Swizzle is often associated with The Swizzle Inn of Bailey's Bay, Bermuda, whose motto is \"Swizzle Inn, Swagger Out.\" The Swizzle Inn is known as \"the home of the Rum Swizzle\" and Bermuda's oldest pub, favourite drinking hole of island resident Michael Douglas \nAs noted by the Bermuda Hotel Association:\nA variant created by Don the Beachcomber in the 1960s, the 151 Swizzle utilize overproofed rum for stronger flavor.\n\n\"Trader Vic's Bartender's Guide\" presents several variant swizzle recipes including the Kingston Swizzle (made with Jamaican rum and hot water), the Kona Swizzle (incorporating almond syrup), and the Martinique Swizzle (flavored with Herbsaint, Pernod or anisette). According to that guide:\n\nThe \"Spirit of Bermuda\" cookbook says that the \"Bermuda swizzle stick\" with which this drink is traditionally stirred and garnished is a three-pronged stick often cut from an allspice bush. The Green Swizzle, a drink for which the recipe \"has been lost in history\" (if it ever existed) is mentioned by Bertie Wooster in \"The Rummy Affair of Old Biffy\" by P. G. Wodehouse:\n\nThe Trader Vic's guide quoted above also has a recipe for a Green Swizzle (this one incorporating green crème de menthe) but specifies it is \"not what Bertie (Wooster) had at Wembley.\"\n\n\n"}
{"id": "18414280", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18414280", "title": "Ecthyma", "text": "Ecthyma\n\nEcthyma is a variation of impetigo, presenting at a deeper level of tissue.\n\nIt is usually associated with Group A (beta-hemolytic) Streptococcus (abbreviated GAS).\n\n"}
{"id": "18417212", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18417212", "title": "Kozhukkatta", "text": "Kozhukkatta\n\nKozhukatta () or Kozhukkattai () is a popular South Indian dumpling made from rice flour, with a filling of grated coconut, jaggery, or chakkavaratti. Kozhukatta, although usually sweet, can sometimes be stuffed with a savory filling. \"Modak\" is a similar dish made in other parts of India.\n\nThe dish is prepared by mixing grated coconut with jaggery syrup, placing it inside dumplings of rice flour, and steaming the dumplings. Ghee, cardamom, finely ground roasted rice flour etc. may be added to enhance the taste and flavour of the filling. In Kerala, a variant of kozhukatta made with atta flour (instead of rice flour) and grated coconut is a staple breakfast among the poorer masses.\n\nIn Tamil Nadu, the dish is traditionally associated with the Hindu God Ganesha and is prepared as an offering (\"naivedhya\") on the occasion of Vinayaka Chathurthi. In Kerala, it is popularly associated with Oshana Sunday evening celebrations of Saint Thomas Christians., and is also eaten as an evening snack with tea or coffee.\n\n\"Kozhukkattai\" is an important part of several natal customs of the Sri Lankan Tamil community. In northern Sri Lanka, there is a custom involving dumplings whose edges are pressed to resemble teeth being dropped gently on a baby's head while the family wishes for the infant to develop healthy teeth. In eastern areas of Sri Lanka such as Amparai district, a smaller version called \"piḷḷai kozhukkaṭṭai\" is prepared by female family members for an expectant mother about four months after conception. These sweets are commonly exchanged at weddings as auspicious symbols of \"plump\" health and fertility.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "18424892", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18424892", "title": "Hanging mercury drop electrode", "text": "Hanging mercury drop electrode\n\nThe hanging mercury drop electrode (HMDE or HDME) is a working electrode variation on the dropping mercury electrode (DME). Experiments run with dropping mercury electrodes are referred to as forms of polarography. If the experiments are performed at an electrode with a constant surface (like the HMDE) it is referred as voltammetry. \n\nLike other working electrodes these electrodes are used in electrochemical studies using three electrode systems when investigating reaction mechanisms related to redox chemistry among other chemical phenomenon.\n\nThe hanging mercury drop electrode (HMDE) produces a partial mercury drop of controlled geometry and surface area at the end of a capillary in contrast to the dropping mercury electrode (DME) which steadily releases drops of mercury during an experiment. The disadvantages a DME experiences due to a constantly changing surface are not experienced by the HMDE since it has static surface area during an experiment. The static surface of the HMDE means it is more likely to suffer from the surface adsorption phenomenon than a DME. Unlike solid electrodes which need to be cleaned and polished between most experiments, the self-renewing HMDE can simply release the contaminated drop and grow a clean drop between each experiment.\n"}
{"id": "18435949", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18435949", "title": "Chura loenpa", "text": "Chura loenpa\n\nChura loenpa is a Tibetan cheese important within the cuisine of Tibet. It is a soft cheese, similar to cottage cheese, made from the curds that are left over from boiling buttermilk.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "18436776", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18436776", "title": "Lomo a lo pobre", "text": "Lomo a lo pobre\n\nLomo a lo pobre, bistec a lo pobre or bife a lo pobre its a dish from Chile and Perú. The common ingredientes for both preparations are the beef tenderloin (Spanish \"lomo\") topped with one or more fried eggs and the French fries. The ingredients that differtiate both dishes are the fried onions, as it is served in Chile, and the rice and fried plantains. Unlike steak and eggs, \"lomo a lo pobre\" is eaten as a lunch or dinner.\n\nThere are several possible origins for the term \"a lo pobre.\"\n\nOne is that it was named because of the irony of nineteenth century Peruvian common folk eating similar dishes with an abundance of food and at a heavy price, despite their economic situation.\n\nAlternatively it may have originated due to the idea that poorer residents of Lima ate meat combined with carbohydrates, eggs, and rice, while higher-class individuals were associated with eating meat alone with a vegetable.\n\nToday it is consumed in lower- and upper-class restaurants, and there is no negative connotation associated with the dish.\n\nThe term \"a lo pobre\" in Lima, Peru today may refer simply to the addition of a fried egg and is used in other dishes besides steak, such as grilled chicken breast (pechuga a lo pobre), rice (especially arroz chaufa), lomo saltado, salchipapas, or even hamburgers.\n\n"}
{"id": "18448332", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18448332", "title": "Balep korkun", "text": "Balep korkun\n\nBalep korkun is a type of bread that is consumed mainly in central Tibet. It is round, flat and relatively easy to make. The ingredients are tsampa (barley flour), water and baking powder. It is cooked in a frying pan. It has been described as similar in appearance to naan.\n\n"}
{"id": "18450158", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18450158", "title": "Höfðingi", "text": "Höfðingi\n\nHöfðingi (, \"chieftain\") is a type of Icelandic cheese, described as a \"creamy-soft, almost runny cheese with a white rind/crust and a smooth, mild flavor.\"\n\n\n"}
{"id": "18458269", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18458269", "title": "Chura kampo", "text": "Chura kampo\n\nChura kampo (Tibetan \"dried cheese\") is a Tibetan cheese and important within the cuisine of Tibet. Chura kampo is made from the curds left over from boiling buttermilk.\n\nThere are many possible shapes for chura kampo. Small pieces of Chura kampo are eaten similarly to how candy bars are eaten in Western countries. This cheese is composed of little chunks of dried hard cheese that last long when it is chewed.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "18465432", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18465432", "title": "Tharid", "text": "Tharid\n\nTharid () is a traditional Arab dish made from pieces of bread in a vegetable or meat broth.\nIt is typically consumed in especially the holy month of Ramadan and is quite popular in Iraq and Arabia.\n\nThe dish belongs to Arabian cultures. The dish is notable in that it was mentioned in a number of hadith attributed to the Prophet Muhammad, in which he said that tharid was the best among all dishes, and that it was superior to other dishes in the way that Aisha was superior to other women.\n\n"}
{"id": "18478936", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18478936", "title": "Ka'í Ladrillo", "text": "Ka'í Ladrillo\n\nKa'í Ladrillo is a typical dessert of the Paraguayan cuisine prepared mainly with peanuts and molasses.\n\nThe name \"ka’i ladrillo\" is the result of the combination of two words, “ka’i” that means “monkey” and “ladrillo” that is brick, used to refer to all things with that shape. So the “ka’i ladrillo” is the “brick of the monkey” because it is usually made with a rectangular form like a brick and because the monkey (ka’i mirikina) is an animal natural of the Paraguayan jungles that likes to eat everything that is sweet. And this dessert is especially sweet. It is also called “azukapé manduví”, Guaraní words for “sugar” (azuká), “flat” (pé) and “peanut” (manduví).\n\nTo prepare the ka’i ladrillo are needed: toast peanuts and molasses. Some varieties of the dish also include a little of sour orange or grapefruit juice, which give it a bittersweet taste and diminishes the excessive sweetness.\n\nThe molasses is boiled, stirring, until it became possible to see the bottom of the pot when passing the spoon. Then, add the peanut, whole or in little pieces (the traditional is made with whole peanuts) and is cooked for a few more minutes. After, the preparation is poured in flat molds previously damped with some cold water, and let it cool. Once cold, the dessert is taken out of the molds.\n\nAccording to some scholars of social history of Paraguay, all the Paraguayan popular gastronomy, which establishes itself as a small family industry after the Paraguayan War where Paraguay fought the Triple Alliance composed of (Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay, between 1864 and 1870), is really abundant in caloric content, because of the situation that overcame to the country after the conflict. In the aftermath of the war, food was limited, groceries were hard to find. So Paraguayan cooking has a high protein content to make up for the scarcity of every day meal.\n\n"}
{"id": "18478987", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18478987", "title": "Soyo (Paraguay)", "text": "Soyo (Paraguay)\n\nSoyo is a thick soup of meat crushed in a mortar, seasoned with several spices and vegetables.\n\nIt is a meal that is always found in the traditional Paraguayan cooking and as all the others, has an important caloric value.\n\nAlthough it was previously considered as a meal only eaten by the people of scarce resources, it has become extraordinarily popular in every social stratum in Paraguay.\n\nThe word “soyo” is short for “so’o josopy”, Guaraní words for “meat” (so’o) and “crushed” (josopyré). The literal translation is “crushed meat”.\n\nWhen the meat is not crushed and instead it is boiled in the soup chopped in little pieces, it called “so’o josopy ita’y”, which it’s interpreted as curdle soup. In this case, it means that the meal is obviously less tasteful that the original version.\n\nThe traditional recipe uses crushed meat, cold water, rice, oil or grease, onion, sweet red pepper, tomato, scallion, a little flour, salt, oregano and parsley.\n\nThe “so’o josopy” is prepared this way: The meat and rice is either crushed with a mortar or ground up in a blender untilit forms a paste. This paste is put in a bowl with cold water and stirred. Chop up the vegetables you want to use as seasoning. These can include onion, tomato, sweet red pepper and scallion. Then put them in a saucepan with hot oil.\n\nThen add the flour to the sauce and mix this with the meat, rice and water. Stir continuously until it boils. Finally add the salt, oregano and parsley.\nIf you make to make it thicker, put in a blender.\n\n"}
{"id": "18488345", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18488345", "title": "Almojábana", "text": "Almojábana\n\nAlmojábana is a type of bread made with cuajada cheese and corn flour.\n\nAn almojábana is a small, bun-shaped bread having a tart flavor.\n\nThe etymology is arguably Arabic in origin. \"Al\" is used as the article, \"mo\" as in doer of action, \"jabana\" as in cheesy derived from habn which means cheese in Arabic (almojabana means the cheesy one).\n\nAlmojábanas are made with masarepa or pre-cooked white cornmeal, cottage cheese, butter, baking powder, salt, eggs and milk.\n\n"}
{"id": "18488429", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18488429", "title": "Pan de yuca", "text": "Pan de yuca\n\nPan de yuca (\"Spanish for Cassava bread\") is a type of bread made of cassava starch and cheese typical of southern Colombia and the Coast Region of Ecuador.\n\nAn 1856 watercolor by Manuel María Paz shows cassava bread being prepared by members of the Saliva people in Casanare Province.\n\n"}
{"id": "18490211", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18490211", "title": "Grapico", "text": "Grapico\n\nGrapico is a caffeine-free, artificially flavored carbonated soft drink with a purple color and a grape taste that is sold in the Southeastern United States. When introduced in 1916, the product quickly became a success, which in part was due to implying that Grapico contained real grape juice even though it contained fake juice. In the spring of 1926, J. Grossman's Sons sold the Grapico business to New Orleans business Pan American Manufacturing Co. Pan American continued J. Grossman's Sons' improper practice of implying that Grapico contained real grape juice and lost the right to use the word \"Grapico\" to designate their artificial grape drink in 1929.\n\nAlthough the J. Grossman's Sons line of the brand had ended, the Grapico brand continued on through Alabama businessman R. R. Rochell and his Birmingham, Alabama-based Grapico Bottling Works. R. R. Rochell had first become a wholesale syrup customer of J. Grossman's Sons in the Summer of 1917 to serve the Alabama soft drink market. By the time Pan American had lost their artificial grape drink name in 1929, Rochell was selling bottled Grapico in Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Mississippi, and Louisiana.\n\nRochell received the federal trademark on Grapico in 1940, giving his Grapico Company of America the right to use the name \"Grapico\" everywhere in the United States. In 1955, Grapico Company of America attempted to expand its fruit-flavored brands with Orangico, a sister product to Grapico that included real orange juice. The orange juice-based Orangico did not sell well and the federal trademark eventually expired. In September 1981, both the franchising rights to the Grapico brand name and The Pepsi Bottling Group in Newnan, Georgia were acquired by Buffalo Rock, an independent Pepsi bottler based in Birmingham, Alabama. Buffalo Rock revived the Orangico trademark in 1999 for an artificially flavored orange drink and introduced Diet Grapico in 2005. Grapico is now produced at Buffalo Rock's Birmingham, Alabama bottling facility.\n\nGrapico was first sold in 1914 in New Orleans, Louisiana by J. Grossman's Sons. In the summer of 1917, businessman R. R. Rochell and his Birmingham, Alabama-based Grapico Bottling Works purchased Grapico syrup barrels from J. Grossman's Sons and bottled and sold Grapico to the Alabama soft drink market. Present Grapico distributor Buffalo Rock, an independent Pepsi bottler based in Birmingham, Alabama, purchased the Grapico business in 1981. The J. Grossman's Sons' Grapico retail sales line ended in 1929 and the present Grapico traces its roots to the summer of 1917 in Birmingham, Alabama through R. R. Rochell's Grapico.\n\nJ. Grossman's Sons was a business that had been operating in New Orleans, Louisiana since at least 1884. By the early 1900s, the business was being run by both Adolph Grossman and Isidore Grossman. Prior to developing Grapico, J. Grossman's Sons served as creditors. In 1905 for example, a collection attorney successfully sued J. Grossman's Sons to recover legal fees for reducing to judgment a debt of $875 owed to J. Grossman's Sons. Also in 1905, J. Grossman's Sons unsuccessfully prevented the sale of their securing collateral, a debtor's home, to the debtor's daughter. In January 1912, J. Grossman's Sons lent $1000 to a Lewisburg, Louisiana saloon owner who they successfully sued eleven months later to recover the amount against his real estate.\n\nJ. Grossman's Sons began manufacturing Grapico in 1914. At that time, Grapico consisted of a syrup that, when mixed with soda water, had the taste, smell, and color of a genuine grape drink. The product was artificially colored and flavored with only an infinitesimal amount of grape juice or fruit of the grape.\n\nPrior to 1916, J. Grossman's Sons contacted American jazz composers Peter DeRose and Ivan Reid to write a song about Grapico. DeRose, who would later be inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame, produced the piano accompanied song, \"Meet Me in the Land of Grapico\". \"Meet Me in the Land of Grapico\" is a sentimental ballad from Tin Pan Alley that imagined a faraway Land of Grapico where love lives forever. The song (\"see below\") and its cover sheet alluded to a grape vine-covered arbor in the Land of Grapico, even though Grapico contained no grape juice. Dedicating the song to all the drinkers of Grapico, J. Grossman's Sons published the song in 1916 and provided it free on request.\n\nIn the Summer of 1917, businessman R. R. Rochell and his Birmingham, Alabama based Grapico Bottling Works began purchasing Grapico syrup barrels from J. Grossman's Sons to bottle and sell the Alabama soft drink market. In that same year, Laurel, Mississippi based Grapico Bottling Company also became a wholesale customer of J. Grossman's Sons and began bottling and selling Grapico in Mississippi. In 1918, Rochell's Grapico Bottling Works opened a bottling plant in Hattiesburg, Mississippi as a second Mississippi bottler and seller of Grapico.\nBy 1919, Grapico manufacturer J. Grossman's Sons was successful enough in their efforts to distribute Grapico that they awarded the Grapico advertising account to the Chambers Agency, Inc. of New Orleans. As early as November 1919, businessman J. C. Kramer was doing business in Louisiana under the name of the Grapico Bottling Works (Louisiana), a business unconnected with Rochell's Grapico Bottling Works.\n\nIn 1920, the demand for soft drinks significantly increased as a result of the prohibition against alcohol in the United States that began on January 29, 1920. The Grapico product was so successful by 1920, that Grapico specifically was listed in the Louisiana law among generic items, Coca-Cola, and RC Cola as items to be taxed: Section 22 of Act No. 233 of 1920, which read:That all persons, associations of persons, firms and corporations engaged in the sale of soda water, ice cream, confections, soda pop, Coca Cola, Chero-Cola, Grapico or other similar soft drinks or beverages or refreshments, shall pay license based on the gross annual sales, and such licenses are hereby fixed and graded as follows.\nIn addition to experiencing taxes as a result of its success, the Grapico efforts found labor troubles. In 1920, the International Union of United Brewery, Flour, Cereal, Soft Drink and Distillery Workers presented Grapico Bottling Company (Mississippi) with a union agreement. When the company refused to sign the agreement, the 112 employees at Grapico Bottling Company were called to strike. The Grapico Bottling Co. eventually signed the agreement.\n\nIn June 1922, Grapico Bottling Works furthered the connection between the artificially flavored beverage and real grape juice through an advertisement campaign. On June 1, 1922, The Jacksonville Metropolis published a Grapico Bottling Works advertisement announcing a ten-day writing contest that offered US$116 in prize money for essays on why a consumer would prefer \"Sparkling Grapico\" over real, fresh grapes. The advertisement indicated that Grapico was made from Pure Grape Juice with pure sugar and carbonated water and had no coloring or preservatives. Although not true, this information was consistent with the Grapico product labels used by J. Grossman's Sons on the barrels that were shipped to and received by R. R. Rochell.\nMississippi based Grapico Bottling Company troubles did not end with its union problems. In September 1924, John Henry Ennis of Ellisville, Mississippi purchased a Grapico. On drinking it, Ennis discovered that the contents were filled with flies, some of which he swallowed and became sick. On filing a lawsuit against Grapico Bottling Company and its sole stockholder, Philip Carriere, Ennis learned that Grapico Bottling Company had filed for and successfully dissolved itself as a corporation between the time Ennis consumed the flies and filed suit against Grapico Bottling. On appeal, the Supreme Court of Mississippi issued an opinion that serve as precedent in Mississippi for the rule that a stockholder of a corporation is not liable for the debts, liabilities, and other acts of the corporation. After Grapico Bottling Company (Mississippi) dissolved in 1925, Rochell's Grapico Bottling Works became the sole supplier of Grapico to Mississippi.\n\nSince almost its inception in 1914, Grapico was associated with real grape juice by J. Grossman's Sons through its advertisements and business stationery. Publicly associating Grapico with genuine grape juice allowed J. Grossman's Sons to compete directly with real grape juice producers such as Welch Grape Juice Co. and have an advantage over other imitation grape flavored beverage producers. A problem with this approach was that Grapico was an artificial grape drink that included neither real grape juice nor fruit from the grape.\nIn May 1926, J. Grossman's Sons became a defunct corporation and sold its Grapico formula and all rights connected to that formula to Pan American Manufacturing Co., Inc., a Louisiana corporation that had been manufacturing and selling extracts, ice cream powder, and syrups and flavors for soft drinks from New Orleans since 1911. Pan American began manufacturing Grapico syrup and concentrate and continued supplying its wholesale customers outside of Louisiana with one-gallon bottles of concentrated Grapico to allow them to make Grapico. In addition, through its subsidiary corporation, World Bottling Co., Pan American continued supplying its retail customers in Louisiana with bottled Grapico for consumption. At the time Pan American acquired the Grapico business, it had three wholesale Grapico customers: Rochell's Grapico Bottling Works in Birmingham, Alabama and two bottling plants operating in Mississippi. Grapico concentrate was sold by Pan American to its wholesale customers for $7.50 per gallon and the finished bottled Grapico was by sold by Pan American and its three wholesale customers at 5 cents per 7-oz bottle.\n\nPan American continued associating their artificial grape drink with real grape juice in advertisements in trade periodicals, display cards, newspapers, boys' caps for customers' use, and in its company stationery. Typically, advertising material displayed images of grape vineyards and bunches of grapes together with the qualifying statements:\n\nSparkling\nGrapico\nNaturally Good\nAcknowledged\nThe Best\nGrape Drink\nOn The Market\nSparkling\nGrapico\nNaturally Good\nThe Drink of The Nation\n\nIn addition, Pan American continued J. Grossman's Sons practice of using 7-oz clear bottles with molded labels prominently featuring a pictorial representation of a bunch of grapes with word \"Grapico\". Given that the product was artificially colored and flavored to simulate the appearance, taste and smell of grape juice, the combination of the advertisements, the bottle grape bunch mold, and the product itself implied to others that the Grapico product was composed of pure grape juice.\n\nIn July 1928, the Federal Trade Commission charged Pan American with unfair methods of competition and deceptive practices. After learning of the Federal Trade Commission complaint, Pan American altered the labels it used on its one-gallon concentrate jugs. However, the efforts were too little, too late and Pan American and its \"representatives, agents, servants, employees, and successors\" lost the right to use the word \"Grapico\" to designate their artificial grape drink as of 1929. Pan American's wholesale customers, including R. R. Rochell, were seen as victims of Pan American's unfair competition and the cease and desist order regarding the Grapico name did not extend to them.\n\nR. R. Rochell was a successful business man operating in Birmingham, Alabama. His success came despite the fact that he was . He was one of two major stock holders in the Edgewood Amusement Company, which dissolved in 1924. Rochell began selling bottled Grapico in Alabama in 1917 and then in Mississippi in 1918. In June 1920, Rochell's Grapico Bottling Works formally incorporated in Alabama as \"The Grapico Bottling Works\".\n\nRochell's early Grapico efforts were not without problems. For example, in November 1921, Grapico Bottling Works acquired a US$648 Baltimore Semi-Automatic Machine, Model B-1485 from New Orleans based Crown Cork and Seal Co. to cork and seal soda water bottles. Within three months, the bottle capper began to fail. Frequently, the neck of the moving bottles became stuck in the machine, which additionally broke bottles whose contents drenched workers. In addition, the caps made by the machine did not seal properly so that carbonation gas escaped from the Grapico bottles. After Grapico refused to pay the US$358 balance, the Sheriff seized the bottling machine from Grapico. The matter was resolved 3½ years later by the Louisiana First Circuit Court of Appeal, who set aside the machine sales contract so that Grapico Bottling Works no longer owed the balance.\n\nBy 1922, R. R. Rochell's Grapico had been expanded into the Florida soft drink market. With Grapico Bottling Company (Mississippi) dissolved in 1925 and Pan American prohibited from using the name \"Grapico\" in connection with the Grapico artificial grape drink, Rochell became the sole supplier of bottled Grapico in Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Mississippi, and Louisiana in 1929.\n\nIn 1938, R. R. Rochell was doing business in Alabama as \"Orange Crush 7-Up Bottling Company.\" At that time, it cost .44312 cents to produce a case of Grapico at Rochell's plant in Birmingham and to deliver that same case approximately away cost .32734 cents, making a total cost of approximately .77 cents per case to deliver a case of soft drinks to the areas surrounding Birmingham. The product was sold at .80 a case, for a .03 cent profit per case.\nJust before he died in early 1940, R. R. Rochell filed for a federal trademark on Grapico on behalf of Orange Crush 7-Up Bottling Company. The federal trademark issued just after Rochell. secured the national rights to the Grapico mark to the Orange Crush 7-Up Bottling Company. In that same year, Grapico was sold using the trademarked slogan, \"The Drink of the Nation • Made its Way by the Way its Made.\"\n\nIn June 1947, Rochell's business began using the names \"The Grapico Bottling Company\" and \"The Grapico Company of America.\" In October 1949, \"The Grapico Bottling Company\" name was changed to \"Orange Crush 7 Up Bottling Company\" to reflect the work it was doing in Alabama on behalf of the Seven-up Company. Despite the Alabama company's efforts, the Seven-up Company refused to grant The Grapico Company of America a bottling franchise to handle Seven-up soft drinks. The business was operating as Orange Crush-Grapico Bottling Company by 1953. In July 1957, the bottling business name was officially changed to \"Orange Crush Grapico Company.\"\n\nIn 1955, Grapico Company of America expanded its fruit flavored brands into orange with Orangico, a play on the name Grapico. Orangico was to include real orange juice. The orange juice based Orangico did not sell well and the federal trademark eventually expired in 1999.\n\nIn September 1981, both the franchising rights to the Grapico brand name and The Pepsi Bottling Group in Newnan, Georgia were acquired by Buffalo Rock, an independent Pepsi bottler founded in Birmingham, Alabama in 1901. Both Buffalo Rock and R.R. Rochell's businesses were located in Birmingham since the early 1900s. For example, in October 1940, R.R. Rochell's business was located at 1031 11th Avenue North and Buffalo Rock's business was located at 10th Avenue and 26th Street North—a distance of about three miles (5 km).\n\nBetween at least 1981 and 1988, Grapico was distributed in only three states: Alabama, Florida and Georgia. In August 1988, Buffalo Rock announced that they would expand distribution of Grapico the rest of the Southeastern United States. The announcement coincided with the new, more contemporary Grapico packaging. By June 1990, Grapico was being sold in South Carolina.\n\nBuffalo Rock revived the Orangico trademark in 1999, this time to be used on an artificial orange syrup rather than a real orange based drink. Buffalo Rock introduced Diet Grapico in 2005. Grapico is produced by Buffalo Rock through its Columbus, Georgia bottling facility, Sun Fresh Beverages, Inc.\n\nGrapico is mentioned in \"Fried Green Tomatoes at the Whistle Stop Cafe,\" 1987 best selling novel by Fannie Flagg. Anne George's 1996 novel \"Murder on a Bad Hair Day: A Southern Sisters Mystery,\" and the 2004 novel \"Making Waves\" by Cassandra King, Grapico mixed with Absolut Peppar jalapeño flavored vodka is a drink called the Ex-girlfriend. It's called the Ex-girlfriend because \"it's sweet and seems like a good idea, but eventually it's going to burn you and make you sick.\" Grapico and coconut rum is called a \"grapicolada.\"\n\n"}
{"id": "18491903", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18491903", "title": "Prutah", "text": "Prutah\n\nPrutah (Hebrew: פרוטה) is a word borrowed from the Mishnah and the Talmud, in which it means \"a coin of smaller value\". The word was probably derived originally from an Aramaic word with the same meaning. \nThe prutah was an ancient copper Jewish coin with low value. A loaf of bread in ancient times was worth about 10 prutot (plural of prutah). One prutah was also worth two lepta (singular lepton), which was the smallest denomination minted by the Hasmonean and Herodian Dynasty kings. \n\nPrutot were also minted by the Roman Procurators of the Province of Judea, and later were minted by the Jews during the First Jewish Revolt (sometimes called 'Masada coins').\n\n\n"}
{"id": "18495624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18495624", "title": "Cibola White Ware", "text": "Cibola White Ware\n\nCibola White Ware is a ceramic tradition of Arizona and New Mexico, dating from 1225-1325 CE.\n\nThe ware was produced roughly from the San Juan River south to the upper Gila River drainage, and from the White Mountains east to the Laguna Pueblo area (Goetze and Mills 1993:21)—and probably east into the Rio Grande drainage. Cibola White Ware shares its basic style (black designs painted on a white or light gray background) with a number of other regional wares, all produced by prehistoric Puebloan peoples. The various wares often shared stylistic ideas, and archaeologists make the various fine distinctions primarily to aid them in dating archaeological deposits and in tracing out prehistoric trade.\n\nMost Cibola White Ware is distinguished from most other black-on-white wares by the use of crushed sherd temper in the preparation of clay for firing, along with the use of mineral-based black paint. If sherd temper is combined with black plant-based paint, the pottery is instead classified as Little Colorado White Ware (produced in the Little Colorado River drainage), with one exception, Chaco-McElmo Black-on-white. Also, some early Cibola White Ware vessels have mixed sand and sherd temper or all sand temper. The following table may help the reader understand where archaeologists have drawn the lines between one prehistoric ware and the next (see Goetze and Mills 1993:27–29 for further assistance).\n\nGoetze, Christine E., and Barbara J. Mills, 1993, Classification Criteria for Types and Wares. In \"Across the Colorado Plateau: Anthropological Studies for the Transwestern Pipeline Project, Volume 16, Interpretation of Ceramic Artifacts,\" by Barbara J. Milles, Christine E. Goetze, and Maria Nieves Zedeńo, pp. 21–85. Office of Contract Archaeology and Maxwell Museum of Anthropology, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque.\n\n"}
{"id": "18516415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18516415", "title": "Spicule (glass manufacture)", "text": "Spicule (glass manufacture)\n\nSpicules are tiny glass flakes which are formed during the manufacture of glass vials. A glass tube is extruded at a constant rate and a jet of water applied to the hot glass is used to cut the blank tube to length. The bottom and lip of the vial are formed by swagging or upset forming while the glass is still hot.\n\nSpicules are formed in a cloud when the glass explodes from the contact of the cold jet. These are held to the glass blank during forming, and if the vial is not reheated or cleaned after manufacture, these spicules can drift off into the mixture subsequently placed in the vial. This is a serious problem in the manufacture of soft contact lenses or pharmaceutical products.\n"}
{"id": "18534098", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18534098", "title": "Nass (Islam)", "text": "Nass (Islam)\n\nNass ( ) is an Arabic word meaning \"a known, or clear, legal injunction\". In Twelver Shi'ah Islam/Ismaili, \"nass\" refers to the designation (nomination) of an Imam or Da'i al-Mutlaq by a previous Imam or Dai.\n"}
{"id": "18534928", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18534928", "title": "Flan", "text": "Flan\n\nA flan, in English and other cuisines, is a dish with an open, rimmed pastry or sponge base containing a sweet or savory filling. Examples are the quiche lorraine, custard tart, leche flan, and the South African melktert.\n\nFlan is known in Roman cuisine. It was often a savory dish, as in \"eel flan\"; sweet flans were also enjoyed.\n\nIn the Middle Ages, both sweet and savory flans (almonds, cinnamon & sugar; cheese, curd, spinach, fish) were very popular in Europe, especially during Lent, when meat was forbidden.\n\nThe English word \"flan\", and the earlier forms \"flaune\" and \"flawn\", come from the Old French \"flaon\" (modern French \"flan\"), in turn from the early Medieval Latin \"fladōn-em\", derived from the Old High German \"flado\", a sort of flat cake, probably from an Indo-European root for \"flat\" or \"broad\".\n\n"}
{"id": "18537793", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18537793", "title": "Poke (pudding)", "text": "Poke (pudding)\n\nPoke or \"Po'e\" is a dessert from the Cook Islands and French Polynesia that is made out of over-ripe bananas, arrowroot starch or tapioca starch and coconut cream. There is a pumpkin version of the dish as well.\n\n"}
{"id": "18540891", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18540891", "title": "Kiszczonka", "text": "Kiszczonka\n\nKiszczonka () is a traditional soup common in Poznań, known also in some other regions of Poland. It consists of water with cooked black pudding, flour, milk and spices. The soup has about 760 kcal.\n"}
{"id": "18556823", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18556823", "title": "High energy biscuit", "text": "High energy biscuit\n\nHigh Energy Biscuits (HEB) are wheat biscuits containing high-protein cereals and vegetable fat. Because of their high energy-to-weight ratio they are procured by the World Food Programme, the food aid branch of the United Nations, for feeding disaster victims worldwide.\n\nHEBs have been provided to a variety of geographical locations. For example, HEBs were delivered to Georgia after the 2008 South Ossetia war. HEBs were also airlifted to Kenya, and more recently distributed in aid in the 2010 Haiti earthquake, and 80 tonnes of high energy biscuits were delivered to the Tunisian border in response to the Libyan crisis.\n\nHEBs are usually packaged in cardboard boxes weighing 10 kg each.\n\nPer 100 g, HEBs have a minimum of 450 kcal of energy, 4.5% maximum moisture, a minimum of 10-15 g of protein, a minimum of 15 g fat, and 10-15 g sugar at a maximum.\n\nHEBs have the following micronutrients at a minimum per 100 g:\n\n"}
{"id": "18557992", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18557992", "title": "Hamster ball", "text": "Hamster ball\n\nHamster balls are hollow spheres made of clear plastic into which hamsters, gerbils, degus and other small rodent pets are placed, allowing them to run around outside their cages without the risk of running away, getting lost under furniture or in walls. They are designed to provide hamsters with exercise. Balls produce an audible rumble across most surfaces, making them easier to locate even when out of sight.\n\nHamster balls have been manufactured and sold since at least the 1970s. Most are made of durable transparent plastic with air holes and a small door or lid to allow the owner to insert or remove the hamster from the ball.\n\nAlthough hamster balls are designed to protect hamsters, there are hazards such as stairs and other high places from which hamsters can fall, resulting in injury or even death. To protect hamsters, owners may place hamster balls on the lower level of their house, away from any stairs. Some owners also create a simple barrier near the stairs, so that they will not roll down the stairs.\n\nAlthough hamster balls have air holes, hamsters should be allowed to take breaks and leave the ball regularly due to a lack of water that could induce heatstroke or exhaustion. It is important to keep watch over the hamster ball at all times while the pet is inside. The ball can pick up too much speed, causing the hamster to somersault inside and potentially be injured.\n\nHamster balls are recommended by the manufacturers for use with hamsters, gerbils, mice, degus and small rats only; they should not be used for chinchillas or guinea pigs, as their size and body structures are different from small rodents, posing a serious hazard to them if placed inside.\n\n"}
{"id": "18560252", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18560252", "title": "Mindoro Cut", "text": "Mindoro Cut\n\nMindoro Cut is a cut in the Town of Farmington in La Crosse County, Wisconsin, which carries Wisconsin Highway 108 through Phillips Ridge, linking Mindoro with West Salem. The cut is deep, long, and wide; it is the second-deepest cut built by hand in the Western Hemisphere and the oldest functional cut which has not been improved upon. Work on the cut began in 1907 and concluded in 1908; the project was completed primarily with hand tools. The Mindoro Cut was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 2007.\n\nMindoro farmers and La Crosse County officials commissioned the Mindoro Cut as part of the Good Roads Movement, linking a creamery in Mindoro with a railroad station in West Salem. Before the cut was made, Phillips Ridge was too steep to be traversed, so traffic to Mindoro had to take a longer route bypassing the ridge. Construction on the cut began in 1907 and was primarily conducted with hand tools, though dynamite was also used. Planners initially thought the ridge was composed entirely of sandstone; construction became more difficult when it was realized that the ridge had an interior made of hard dolomite. Since horses could not be effectively used on the steep slope, waste rock was removed from the site via wheelbarrows which were balanced on narrow, uneven planks. Louis Miller, a contractor and supervisor of the project, would fire workers who toppled their wheelbarrow three times; many workers reportedly left the job after bringing their first load down the ridge. Workers were paid $1.25 per day and purchased meals from an on-site cook shanty. The project was completed in 1908; its ultimate cost was $11,241.29, reportedly a loss to its contractors. The highway was paved through the cut and guardrails were put in place in 1920; the cut has not been changed since. The cut was added to the Wisconsin State Register of Historic Places in October 2006 and the National Register of Historic Places on May 15, 2007.\n\n"}
{"id": "18564012", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18564012", "title": "Economy rice", "text": "Economy rice\n\nEconomy rice, found in Singapore, Malaysia and Thailand, refers not to a specific dish in the Singaporean, Malaysian and Thai pantheon of cuisine, but rather to a type of food or a food stall commonly found in hawker centres, street vendors or food courts in these countries.\n\nEconomy rice stalls typically consist of a glass case containing anywhere from 10-15 troughs of cooked food, including meat, vegetables, eggs and tofu. Customers select any combination of these dishes, which are served accompanied by a portion of steamed white rice. In Singapore, it is more common to find the food on open troughs kept warm by hot water and an electric heater below.\n\nBetter quality economy rice stalls have warmers beneath the troughs of food which ensure that food is served hot.\n\nEconomy rice is thought of as a predominantly Chinese food - it is roughly analogous to the Malay or Indonesian concept of Nasi Padang or Nasi Campur (mixed rice). It is what most Chinese Singaporeans and Malaysians think of when they refer to 'home-cooked food' as it is similar to what would be eaten at home, with rice forming the basis of their meal and accompanied by various cooked dishes.\n\nEconomy rice stalls thus evolved as a way for the general public to obtain a quick, and most importantly, cheap meal option outside of home. An Economy Rice meal is usually one of the cheapest options available for a meal at a hawker centre (hence its name), especially if one is judicious in choosing the less expensive dishes (generally vegetables and tofu).\n\nCommon dishes offered at an economy rice stall can include sweet and sour pork, braised tofu, braised cabbage, steamed egg custard, stir-fried Chinese vegetables, fried eggs, and an assortment of deep-fried items.\n\nTrue to its Chinese origins, most of the dishes on offer tend to have their roots in Chinese cuisine.\n\nEconomy rice is known by several other names, and in general conversation it is rare for anyone to refer to it as such, even though many stalls tend to proclaim \"Economy rice\" on their signboards.\n\nOther names for economy rice include Chap Fan () or Chap Chye Png () in Hokkien and colloquially, \"Point Point Rice\", named for the method of ordering one's meal which involves simply asking for a plate of rice and then pointing at the various dishes desired. It is unclear how the latter term originated.\n"}
{"id": "18574443", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18574443", "title": "Sindhi Shaikh", "text": "Sindhi Shaikh\n\nSheikh (Arabic and ), is an Arabic word meaning elder of a tribe, lord, revered old man, or Islamic scholar. The Shaikh of Sindh are one of the larger communities of the Sindhi Muslims ethnic group. They speak the various dialects of Sindhi, depending on their place of residence. The Shaikh are largely urban community, residing in the towns and cities of Sindh. Shaikhs have different community in them, namely baghdadi, sanjogi, nangani, deewan and chatani.\n\nIn South Asia, it is used as an ethnic title generally attributed to Muslim trading families descended from the higher clans and are generally very rich and powerful in the local administration and economy.\n\n\n \n"}
{"id": "18578788", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18578788", "title": "Sopressa", "text": "Sopressa\n\nSopressa is an Italian aged salami, produced with pork, lard, salt, pepper, spices and garlic. It is a typical product of Veneto, in northern Italy. \n\nThe sopressa is a salami, typical of the Venetian culinary tradition and for this reason there are various types (such as sopressa Treviso), Sopressa Vicentina, produced in the province of Vicenza, has been awarded the Protected Geographical Status by the European Union. Moreover, in the site of Veneto Region you can view the production specification of this product (divided into eight articles).\n\nIn order to protect Soprèssa Vicentina from easy counterfeiting and for greater consumer protection, the \"Consorzio di Tutela della Soprèssa Vicentina DOP\" has emerged, which brings together 4 local producers scattered around Vicenza.\n"}
{"id": "18582080", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18582080", "title": "Bammy", "text": "Bammy\n\nBammy or bami is a traditional Jamaican cassava flatbread descended from the simple flatbread eaten by the Arawaks, Jamaica's original inhabitants. Today, it is produced in many rural communities and sold in stores and by street vendors in Jamaica and abroad.\n\nBammies have been consumed since pre-Columbian times and is believed to have originated with the native Arawak people. For centuries, it was the bread staple for rural Jamaicans until the cheaper, imported wheat flour breads became popular in the post-World War II era.\n\nIn the 1990s, the United Nations and the Jamaican government established a program to revive bammy production and to market it as a modern, convenient food product.\n\nBammy is made from bitter cassava (also called yuca and manioc in other American cultures). Traditionally, the cassava is grated and placed in a press bag (woven with thatch leaves) and placed in an outdoor press where heavy stones are loaded on. Once completely drained, but still a bit moist, the cassave is beaten in a mortar then sieved to a fine flour texture. Salt is then added to taste.\n\nThe actual baking of bammies varies across Jamaican communities. Traditionally, it is made by spreading a handful of the flour evenly in a baking ring on a flat iron or griddle on the open fire. While baking, the top of the bammy is patted with a flat board and then turned over. The baking process takes about 3 minutes and the final product is a thin, foldable bread about 10\" in diameter. This is similar to traditional tortillas of Native American cultures. It can then be eaten with whatever fillings are desired.\n\nThe more modern (and popular) approach is to bake thicker bammies about 6\" in diameter. These are often mass-produced in factories. When home-baked, the flour may be store-bought or made by hand-pressing. The bammy can be baked on griddles or in baking pans on a stove top. Some choose to bake it inside an oven, and to add butter and other spices before baking. Baking takes longer due to the thickness, and the final product is then cut into halves or wedges for freezing. When ready to eat, the wedges are soaked in coconut milk and then fried to a golden brown, and served with meat, fish, avocado, or other side dishes.\n\nBammies, like wheat bread and tortillas, are served at any meal or consumed as a snack.\n\n"}
{"id": "18588230", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18588230", "title": "Pélardon", "text": "Pélardon\n\nPélardon, formerly called \"paraldon\", \"pélardou\" and also \"péraudou\", is a French cheese from the Cévennes range of the Languedoc-Roussillon region. It is a traditional cheese made from goat's milk. It is round soft-ripened cheese covered in a white mold (\"à pâte molle à croûte fleurie\") weighing approximately 60 grams, with a diameter of 60-70 mm and a height of 22-27 mm. Pélardon has benefited from \"Appellation d'origine contrôlée\" (AOC) status since August 2000.\n\n"}
{"id": "18589377", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18589377", "title": "Lunch", "text": "Lunch\n\nLunch, the abbreviation for luncheon, is a meal eaten around midday. During the 20th century, the meaning gradually narrowed to a small or mid-sized meal eaten midday. Lunch is commonly the second meal of the day, after breakfast. The meal varies in size depending on the culture, and significant variations exist in different areas of the world.\n\nThe abbreviation \"lunch\" is taken from the more formal Northern English word \"luncheon\", which is derived from the Anglo-Saxon word \"nuncheon\" or \"nunchin\" meaning 'noon drink'. The term has been in common use since 1823. The \"Oxford English Dictionary\" (\"OED\") reports usage of the words beginning in 1580 to describe a meal that was eaten between more substantial meals. It may also mean a piece of cheese or bread.\n\nIn medieval Germany, there are references to \"similariar\", a \"sir lunchentach\" according to the \"OED\", a noon draughtof ale, with breadan extra meal between midday dinner and supper, especially during the long hours of hard labour during haying or early harvesting.\n\nMeals have become ingrained in each society as being natural and logical. What one society eats may seem extraordinary to another. The same is true of what was eaten long ago in history as food tastes, menu items and meal periods have changed greatly over time. For example, the word \"supper\" means bread and soup (from the German word \"sop\"- soup or stew over bread). \n\nIn general, during the Middle Ages the main meal for almost everyone took place late in the morning, after several hours of work, when there was no need for artificial lighting. During the 17th and 18th centuries, this meal, called dinner, was gradually pushed back into the evening, creating a greater time gap between breakfast and dinner. A meal called \"lunch\" came to fill the gap. A formal evening meal, artificially lit by candles, sometimes with entertainment, was a \"supper party\" as late as the Regency era.\n\nUp until the early 19th century, luncheon was generally reserved for the ladies, who would often have lunch with one another when their husbands were out. As late as 1945, Emily Post wrote in the magazine \"Etiquette\" that luncheon is \"generally given by and for women, but it is not unusual, especially in summer places or in town on Saturday or Sunday, to include an equal number of men\"hence the mildly disparaging phrase, \"the ladies who lunch\". Lunch was a ladies' light meal; when the Prince of Wales stopped to eat a dainty luncheon with lady friends, he was laughed at for this effeminacy.\n\nBeginning in the 1840s, afternoon tea supplemented this luncheon at four o'clock. \"Mrs Beeton's Book of Household Management\" (1861)a guide to all aspects of running a household in Victorian Britain, edited by Isabella Beetonhad much less to explain about luncheon than about dinners or ball suppers:\n\nWith the onset of industrialisation in the 19th century, male workers began to work long shifts at the factory, severely disrupting the age-old eating habits of rural life. Initially, workers were sent home for a brief dinner provided by their wives, but as the workplace was moved farther from the home, working men took to providing themselves with something portable to eat during a break in the middle of the day.\n\nThe lunch meal slowly became institutionalised in England when workers with long and fixed hour jobs at the factory were eventually given an hour off work to eat lunch and thus gain strength for the afternoon shift. Stalls and later chop houses near the factories began to provide mass-produced food for the working class, and the meal soon became an established part of the daily routine, remaining so to this day.\n\nIn many countries and regions lunch is the dinner or main meal. Prescribed lunchtimes allow workers to return to their homes to eat with their families. Consequently, where lunch is the customary main meal of the day, businesses close during lunchtime. Lunch also becomes dinner on special days, such as holidays or special events, including, for example, Christmas dinner and harvest dinners such as Thanksgiving; on these special days, dinner is usually served in early afternoon. Among Christians, the main meal on Sunday, whether at a restaurant or at home, is called \"Sunday dinner\", and is served after morning church services.\n\nA traditional Bengali lunch is a seven-course meal. Bengali cuisine is a culinary style originating in Bengal, a region in the eastern part of the Indian subcontinent, which is now divided between Bangladesh and West Bengal. The first course is \"shukto\", which is a mix of vegetables cooked with few spices and topped with a coconut sauce. The second course consists of rice, dal, and a vegetable curry. The third course consists of rice and fish curry. The fourth course is that of rice and meat curry (generally chevon, mutton, chicken or lamb). The fifth course contains sweet preparations like rasgulla, pantua, rajbhog, sandesh, etc. The sixth course consists of payesh or mishti doi (sweet yogurt). The seventh course is that of paan, which acts as a mouth freshener.\n\nIn China today, lunch is not nearly as complicated as it was before industrialisation. Rice, noodles and other mixed hot foods are often eaten, either at a restaurant or brought in a container. Western cuisine is not uncommon. It is called 午餐 or 午饭 in most areas.\n\nLunch in Denmark, referred to as \"frokost\", is a light meal. Often it includes rye bread with different toppings such as liver pâté, herring, and cheese. Smørrebrød is a Danish lunch delicacy that is often used for business meetings or special events.\n\nIn Finland, lunch is a full hot meal, served as one course, sometimes with small salads and desserts. Dishes are diverse, ranging from meat or fish courses to soups that are heavy enough to constitute a meal.\n\nIn France, the midday meal is taken between noon and 2:00pm.\n\nIn Germany lunch is the main meal of the day. It is traditionally a substantial hot meal, sometimes with additional courses like soup and dessert. It is usually a savoury dish, consisting of protein (e.g., meat), starchy foods (e.g., potatoes) and vegetables or salad. Casseroles and stews are popular as well. There are a few sweet dishes like Germknödel or rice pudding that can serve as a main course, too. Lunch is called \"Mittagessen\"literally, \"midday's food\".\n\nIn the Netherlands, Belgium and Norway, it is common to eat sandwiches for lunch: slices of bread that people usually carry to work or school and eat in the canteen. The slices of bread are usually filled with sweet or savoury foodstuffs such as chocolate sprinkles (vlokken), apple syrup, peanut butter, slices of meat, cheese or kroket. The meal typically includes coffee, milk or juice, and sometimes yogurt, some fruit or soup. It is eaten around noon, during a lunch break.\n\nIn Portugal, lunch (\"almoço\" in Portuguese) consists of a full hot meal, similar to dinner, normally with soup, a meat or fish course, and dessert. It is served between noon and 2:00pm. It is the main meal of the day throughout the country with the exceptions of the Metropolitan areas of Lisbon and Porto, where lighter meals or snacks are not uncommon. The Portuguese word \"lanches\" derives from the English word \"lunch\", but it refers to a lighter meal or snack taken during the afternoon (around 5pm) due to the fact that, traditionally, Portuguese dinner is served at a later hour than in English-speaking countries.\n\nIn Spain, the midday meal, \"lunch\" takes place between 1:00pm and 3:00pm and is effectively dinner, (the main meal of the day); in contrast, supper does not usually begin until between 8:30pm and 10:00pm. Being the main meal of the day everywhere, it usually consists of a three-course meal: the first course usually consists of an appetizer; the main course of a more elaborate dish, usually meat- or fish-based; the dessert of something sweet, often accompanied by a coffee or small amounts of spirits. Most places of work have a complete restaurant with a lunch break of a least an hour. Spanish schools have a complete restaurant as well, and students have a one-hour break. Three courses are common practice at home, workplace, and schools. Most small shops close for between two and four hoursusually between 1:30pm to 4:30pmto allow to go home for a full lunch.\n\nIn Sweden, lunch is usually a full hot meal, much as in Finland.\n\nIn the United Kingdom, lunch is often a small meal, designed to stave off hunger until returning home from work and eating dinner. It is usually eaten early in the afternoon. Lunch is often purveyed and consumed in pubs. Pub lunch dishes include fish and chips, ploughman's lunch and others.\n\nIn Hungary, lunch is traditionally the main meal of the day, following a \"leves\" (soup).\n\nIn Poland the main meal of the day (called \"obiad\") is traditionally eaten between 1:00pm and 5:00pm, and consists of a soup and a main dish. Most Poles equate the English word \"lunch\" with \"obiad\" because it is the second of the three main meals of the day; \"śniadanie\" (breakfast), \"obiad\" (lunch/dinner) and \"kolacja\" (dinner/supper). There is another meal eaten by some called \"drugie śniadanie\", which means \"second breakfast\". \"Drugie śniadanie\" is eaten around 10:00am and is a light snack, usually consisting of sandwiches, salad or a thin soup.\n\nIn Russia, the midday meal is taken in the afternoon. Usually, lunch is the biggest meal and consists of a first course, usually a soup, and a second course which would be meat and a garnish. Tea is standard.\n\nIn Bosnia and Herzegovina, lunch is the main meal of the day. It is traditionally a substantial hot meal, sometimes with additional courses like soup and dessert. It is usually a savoury dish, consisting of protein (such as meat), starchy foods (such as potatoes), and a vegetable or salad. It is usually eaten around 2:00pm.\n\nIn Romania, lunch (\"prânz\" in Romanian) is the main hot meal of the day. It is usually eaten at 12:00, but never later than 3:00pm. Lunch normally consists of two dishes: usually, the first course is a light soup and the second course, the main course, often consists of meat accompanied by potato, rice or pasta (garnitură) Traditionally, people used to bake and eat desserts, but nowadays it is less common. On Sundays, the lunch is more consistent and is usually accompanied by an appetiser or salad.\n\nIn the West Asia (Middle East) and in most Arab countries, lunch is eaten between 1:00pm and 4:00pm and is the main meal of the day. It usually consists of meat, rice, vegetables and sauces and is sometimes but not always followed by dessert. Lunch is also eaten as a light meal at times in the West Asia(Middle East), such as when children arrive at home from school while the parents are still out working. Water is commonly served, which may be iced, and other beverages such as soft drinks or yogurt drinks are also consumed.\n\nIn the United States and Canada, lunch is usually a moderately sized meal generally eaten around noon. During the work week, North Americans generally eat a quick lunch that often includes some type of sandwich, soup, or leftovers from the previous night's dinner (e.g., rice or pasta). Children often bring packed lunches to school, which might consist of a sandwich such as bologna (or other cold cut) and cheese, tuna, chicken, or peanut butter and jelly, or, in Canada, savoury pie, as well as some fruit, chips, dessert and a drink such as juice, milk, or water. Adults may leave work to go out for a quick lunch, which might include some type of hot or cold sandwich such as a hamburger or \"sub\" sandwich. Salads and soups are also common, as well as a soup and sandwich, tacos, burritos, sushi, bento boxes, and pizza. Lunch may be consumed at various types of restaurants, such as formal, fast casual and fast food restaurants. Canadians and Americans generally do not go home for lunch, and lunch rarely lasts more than an hour except for business lunches, which may last longer. In the United States the three-martini lunchso called because the meal extends to the amount of time it takes to drink three martinishas been making a comeback since 2010. Businesses can deduct 80% of the cost of these lunches. Children generally are given a break in the middle of the school day to eat lunch. Public schools often have a cafeteria where children can buy lunch or eat a packed lunch. Boarding schools and private schools, including universities, often have a cafeteria where lunch is served.\n\nIn Mexico, lunch (\"Comida\") is usually the main meal of the day and normally takes place between 2:00pm and 4:00pm. It usually includes three or four courses: the first is an entrée of rice, noodles or pasta, but also may include a soup or salad. The second consists of a main dish, called a \"guisado\", served with one or two side dishes such as refried beans, cooked vegetables, rice or salad. The main dish is accompanied by tortillas or a bread called \"bolillo\". The third course is a combination of a traditional dessert or sweet, \"café de olla\", and a digestif. During the meal, it is usual to drink \"aguas frescas\", although soft drinks have gained ground in recent years.\n\nIn Australia, a light meal eaten in the period between 10:30am and noon is considered brunch; an actual lunch will be eaten between 12 and 2PM. While usually consisting of fruit or a cereal product, a typical Australian brunch may include other foods as well such as burgers, sandwiches, other light food items, and hot dishes. Sometimes a meal during the late afternoon is referred to as \"afternoon tea\", a meal in which food portions are usually significantly smaller than at lunch, sometimes consisting of nothing more than coffee or other beverages.\n\nIn Argentina, lunch is usually the main meal of the day, and normally takes place between noon and 2:00 p.m. People usually eat a wide variety of foods, such as chicken, beef, pasta, salads, and a drink like water, soda or wine, and some dessert. Although at work, people usually take a fast meal which can consist of a sandwich brought from home or bought as fast food.\n\nIn Brazil, lunch is the main meal of the day, taking place between 11:30 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. Brazilians basically eat rice with beans, salad, french fries, some kind of meat or pasta dishes. But the kind of food may vary from region to region.\n\nSince lunch typically falls in the early-middle of the working day, it can either be eaten on a break from work, or as part of the workday. The difference between those who work through lunch and those who take it off could be a matter of cultural, social class, bargaining power, or the nature of the work. Also, to simplify matters, some cultures refer to meal breaks at work as \"lunch\" no matter when they occureven in the middle of the night. This is especially true for jobs that have employees that rotate shifts.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "18590115", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18590115", "title": "Bánh hỏi", "text": "Bánh hỏi\n\nBánh hỏi is a Vietnamese dish consisting of rice vermicelli woven into intricate bundles and often topped with chopped scallions or garlic chives sauteed in oil, served with a complementary meat dish. The strings of noodles are usually only as thin as a toothpick; the texture is firm enough so the noodles do not fall apart, but is not at all sticky to keep the dish light and suitable for a breakfast treat.\n\n\"Bánh hỏi\" originated from the Bình Định Province of Vietnam's South Central Coast region. People in Bình Định eat \"bánh hỏi\" for almost any meal during the day, instead of rice or noodle soups.\n\nMaking \"bánh hỏi\" is a multistep process. First, good rice is soaked in water overnight, then washed with water again three or four times until the water comes out clear. Then the rice is either ground with water into a mixture, or ground without water, but mixed into water three or four times afterward to leaven it without using any additional agent. The flour mixture is then either steamed and kneaded, or cooked in a pan, stirred continuously until it starts to coagulate, but no flour gets stuck on the stirring tool. This step is crucial in making \"bánh hỏi\" soft, light, and not sticky, but the strings of noodles will still have a firm texture. When the experienced \"bánh hỏi\" maker feels the dough is done, it is ready for pressing.\n\nSpecial copper or aluminum cylinders, with several small holes (the size of a needle eye), shape the cooked dough into noodle form. Pressing the dough requires great strength, as the dough is hard and the holes are small, so it is usually done with leverage. When one person presses the dough, another \"catches\" the noodles coming out on the other side, presses them together and cuts them off every 10 cm or so, creating a kind of mesh of noodle, which is then laid onto a flat surface, but not in layers. Finally, the sheets are steamed one last time for about five minutes.\n\nLike \"bún\" (rice vermicelli) dishes, \"bánh hỏi\" is served cold. Traditionally \"bánh hỏi\" in Bình Định is rolled into bundles and always served with chopped garlic chives. The garlic chives are quickly stir-fried with oil, its aroma and taste goes well with \"bánh hỏi\", which makes the dish enjoyable by itself and without any other kinds of herbs.\n\nIn central Vietnam, such as Huế, \"bánh hỏi\" is eaten with dried prawns and \"nước chấm\". In southern Vietnam, \"bánh hỏi\" is eaten with a variety of meats, especially roast pork or duck. There are also \"bánh hỏi\" \"chả giò\", \"bánh hỏi\" with shrimp paste on sugar cane stick, and \"bánh hỏi\" with grilled pork, chicken, or beef. At the Gò Duối market in Xuân Lộc commune, Sông Cầu district, Phú Yên Province, one also finds \"bánh hỏi lòng heo Gò Duối\", which is \"bánh hỏi\" with boiled pig offal.\n\nSince making \"bánh hỏi\" is a skillful process, the dish is highly regarded, and is served at ceremonial parties, such as wedding and ancestor memorial days.\n\nCovering \"bánh hỏi\" tightly reduces surface drying, which can make it sour, so market sellers put fresh \"bánh hỏi\" in bamboo baskets with banana leaves, and usually leave it open to air. For convenience or sanitary reasons, there are dried, packaged \"bánh hỏi\", similar to dried, packaged rice vermicelli, for people who want to cook it themselves instead of buying fresh \"bánh hỏi\" from the markets.\n\n"}
{"id": "18593703", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18593703", "title": "Lady Arundel's Manchet", "text": "Lady Arundel's Manchet\n\nLady Arundel's Manchet is a traditional version of a manchet, a traditional English yeast bread from Sussex.\n\nThe recipe for Lady Arundel's Manchet was first published in 1653 according to Elizabeth David. It was a luxurious bread eaten by the medieval aristocracy and remained popular into the Restoration period. A recipe appears in \"A True Gentlewoman's Delight\" (1653) printed for the Countess of Kent.\n\nLady Arundel's Manchets crossed the Atlantic to Virginia with the early colonists according to Katherine E Harbury.\n\nFlorence White also references Lady Arundel's Manchet's in her 1932 English Cookery book \"Good Things in England\", publishing a description of a 1676 recipe and updating it for a contemporary readership.\n\nManchets were often used as part of other dishes. For example, a recipe for a baked pudding that incorporates manchet is included in \"Things Not Generally Known, Familiarly Explained,\" citing The Queene's Royal Cookbook of 1713. This is a rich pudding that includes double cream, the addition of beef suet and added aromatics such as nutmeg, cinnamon and rose water.\n\nLady Arundel's Manchets are rarely made today. Manchets generally ceased to appear in English cookery books after 1800. The closest similar yeast bread is probably a Bath bun or a Sally Lunn bun.\n\nIn series 3 of UK television series The Great British Bake-off Cathryn Dresser from Sussex made Lady Arundel's manchets serving them with an inner layer of cream and jam.\n"}
{"id": "18598020", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18598020", "title": "Fried chicken", "text": "Fried chicken\n\nFried chicken (also referred to as Southern fried chicken for the variant in the United States) is a dish consisting of chicken pieces usually from broiler chickens which have been floured or battered and then pan-fried, deep fried, or pressure fried. The breading adds a crisp coating or crust to the exterior of the chicken. What separates fried chicken from other fried forms of chicken is that generally the chicken is cut at the joints, and the bones and skin are left intact. Crisp well-seasoned skin, rendered of excess fat, is a hallmark of well made fried chicken.\n\nThe first dish known to have been deep fried was fritters, which were popular in the European Middle Ages. However, it was the Scottish who were the first Europeans to deep fry their chicken in fat (though without seasoning). Meanwhile, a number of West African peoples had traditions of seasoned fried chicken (though battering and cooking the chicken in palm oil). Scottish frying techniques and West African seasoning techniques were combined by enslaved Africans and African-Americans in the American South.\n\nPrior to the rise of synthetic pesticides in the Second World War and their role in the development of intensive industrial animal farming, chicken meat was a delicacy and very expensive. Eating chicken, including fried chicken, was only enjoyed on special occasions. Then, with intensive chicken husbandry, and especially in the late 1900s and early 2000s with mass-production of fried chicken, the price of the dish has gone down significantly.\n\nWhen being cooked, fried chicken is often divided into smaller pieces. The chicken is then generally covered in a batter, often consisting of ingredients such as eggs or milk, and a thickener such as flour. This is used to create a crust on the exterior of the meat. In addition, seasoning is often added at this stage. Once the chicken is ready to be cooked, it is placed in a deep fryer, frying pan or pressure cooker (depending on the method used) and fried in lard or a type of oil.\n\nThe dish has created a large number of spin-off recipes which are commonly used around the world. For example, Korean fried chicken, a dish which is commonly served as fast food in Korea and is known for being crispier than normal fried chicken. There is also a racial stereotype surrounding fried chicken and African-American people, mostly because it was popular among slaves in the American Civil War.\n\nThe Roman cookbook of \"Apicius\" (4th century) has a recipe for deep-fried chicken called \"Pullum Frontonianum\". \n\nThe American English expression \"fried chicken\" is first recorded in the 1830s, and frequently appears in American cookbooks of the 1860s and 1870s.\nThe origin of fried chicken in the southern states of America has been traced to precedents in either \nScottish or West African cuisine. \nScottish fried chicken was cooked in fat (though unseasoned) while West African fried chicken was seasoned (but battered and cooked in palm oil). Scottish frying techniques and African seasoning techniques were used in the American South by African slaves. Fried chicken provided some means of independent economy for enslaved and segregated African-American women, who became noted sellers of poultry (live or cooked) as early as the 1730s. Because of this and the expensive nature of the ingredients, it was, despite popular belief, a rare dish in the African-American community reserved (as in Africa) for special occasions.\n\nAfter the development of larger and faster-growing hogs (due to crosses between European and Asian breeds) in the 18th and 19th century in the United States, backyard and small-scale hog production provided an inexpensive means of converting waste food, crop waste, and garbage into calories (in a relatively small space and in a relatively short period of time). Many of those calories came in the form of fat and rendered lard. Lard was used for almost all cooking and was a fundamental component in many common homestead foods (many that today are still regarded as holiday and comfort foods) like biscuits and pies. The economic and caloric necessity of consuming lard and other saved fats may have led to the popularity of fried foods, not only in the US, but worldwide. In the 19th century cast iron became widely available for use in cooking. The combination of flour, lard, a chicken and a heavy pan placed over a relatively controllable flame became the beginning of today's fried chicken.\n\nWhen it was introduced to the American South, fried chicken became a common staple. Later, as the slave trade led to Africans being brought to work on southern plantations, the slaves who became cooks incorporated seasonings and spices that were absent in traditional Scottish cuisine, enriching the flavor. Since most slaves were unable to raise expensive meats, but generally allowed to keep chickens, frying chicken on special occasions continued in the African American communities of the South. It endured the fall of slavery and gradually passed into common use as a general Southern dish. Since fried chicken traveled well in hot weather before refrigeration was commonplace, it gained further favor in the periods of American history when segregation closed off most restaurants to the black population. Fried chicken continues to be among this region's top choices for \"Sunday dinner\". Holidays such as Independence Day and other gatherings often feature this dish.\n\nSince the American Civil War, traditional slave foods like fried chicken, watermelon, and chitterlings have suffered a strong association with African-American stereotypes and blackface minstrelsy. This was commercialized for the first half of the 20th century by restaurants like Sambo's and Coon Chicken Inn, which selected exaggerated depictions of blacks as mascots, implying quality by their association with the stereotype. Although also being acknowledged positively as \"soul food\" today, the affinity that African-American culture has for fried chicken has been considered a delicate, often pejorative issue. While the perception of fried chicken as an ethnic dish has been fading for several decades, with the ubiquity of fried chicken dishes in the US, it persists as a racial stereotype.\n\nBefore the industrialization of chicken production, and the creation of broiler breeds of chicken, only young spring chickens (pullets or cockerels) would be suitable for the higher heat and relatively fast cooking time of frying, making fried chicken a luxury of spring and summer. Older, tougher birds require longer cooking times at lower temperatures. To compensate for this, sometimes tougher birds are simmered till tender, allowed to cool and dry, and then fried. (This method is common in Australia.) Another method is to fry the chicken pieces using a pan-fried method. The chicken pieces are then simmered in liquid, usually, a gravy made in the pan that the chicken pieces were cooked in. This process (of flouring, frying and simmering in gravy) is known as \"smothering\" and can be used for other tough cuts of meat, such as swiss steak. Smothered chicken is still consumed today, though with the exception of people who raise their own chickens, or who seek out stewing hens, it is primarily made using commercial broiler chickens.\n\nFried chicken has been described as being \"crunchy\" and \"juicy\", as well as \"crispy\". In addition, the dish has also been called \"spicy\" and \"salty\". Occasionally, fried chicken is also topped with a chili like paprika, or hot sauce to give it a spicy taste. This is especially common in fast food restaurants and chains such as KFC. The dish is traditionally served with mashed potato, gravy, macaroni and cheese, coleslaw and biscuits.\n\nThe dish is renowned for being greasy, especially when coming from fast food outlets. It has even been reported that some of those who enjoy eating the food limit themselves to eating it only a certain number of times a year, to keep their fat intake reasonably low. Out of the various parts of the animal used in fried chicken, the wings generally tend to contain the most fat, with almost of fat for every . However, the average whole fried chicken contains only around 12% fat, or per every . As well as this, grams of fried chicken generally contains around 240 calories of energy.\n\nOne of the main causes of the large amounts of fat which can be found in fried chicken is the oil which is used to cook it.\n\nGenerally, chickens are not fried whole; instead, the chicken is divided into its constituent pieces. The two white meat sections are the breast and the wing from the front of the chicken, while the dark meat sections are the thigh and leg or \"drumstick\", are from the rear of the chicken. These pieces are usually subdivided into the wings, the breasts (the wishbone is often cut out first in home cooking), the legs, and the thighs. The ribs are sometimes left on the breast, but commercially they and the back are usually discarded.\n\nTo prepare the chicken pieces for frying, they may be coated in a batter of flour and liquid (and seasonings) mixed together. The batter can contain ingredients like eggs, milk, and leavening. Alternatively, they may be dredged in flour or a similar dry substance, to coat the meat and to develop a crust. Seasonings such as salt, pepper, cayenne pepper, paprika, garlic powder, onion powder, or ranch dressing mix can be mixed in with the flour. Either process may be preceded by marination or by dipping in milk or buttermilk. As the pieces of chicken cook, some of the moisture that exudes from the chicken is absorbed by the coating of flour and browns along with the flour, creating a flavorful crust. According to Nathan Bailey's 1736 cookbook, \"Dictionarium Domesticum\", for example, the chicken can be covered in a marinade that consists of the juice of two large fresh lemons, malt vinegar, bay leaves, salt, pepper, ground cloves, and green onions; it then must be settled in the marinade for three hours before being dipped in the batter that consists of all-purpose flour, white wine, three egg yolks and salt, and then slowly submerged in a deep pot of either oil, lard, or clarified butter over an open fire. It can then be topped with fresh, dried parsley dipped in the same frying oil.\n\nTraditionally, lard is used to fry the chicken, but corn oil, peanut oil, canola oil, or vegetable oil are also frequently used (although clarified butter may be used as well like in colonial times). The flavor of olive oil is generally considered too strong to be used for traditional fried chicken, and its low smoke point makes it unsuitable for use. There are three main techniques for frying chickens: pan frying, deep frying and broasting.\nPan frying (or shallow frying) requires a frying pan of sturdy construction and a source of fat that does not fully immerse the chicken. The chicken pieces are prepared as above, then fried. Generally the fat is heated to a temperature hot enough to seal (without browning, at this point) the outside of the chicken pieces. Once the pieces have been added to the hot fat and sealed, the temperature is reduced. There is debate as to how often to turn the chicken pieces, with one camp arguing for often turning and even browning, and the other camp pushing for letting the pieces render skin side down and only turning when absolutely necessary. Once the chicken pieces are close to being done the temperature is raised and the pieces are browned to the desired color (some cooks add small amounts of butter at this point to enhance browning). The moisture from the chicken that sticks and browns on the bottom of the pan become the fonds required to make gravy.\n\nDeep frying requires a deep fryer or other device in which the chicken pieces can be completely submerged in hot fat. The process of deep frying is basically placing food fully in oil and then cooking it at a very high temperature. The pieces are prepared as described above. The fat is heated in the deep fryer to the desired temperature. The pieces are added to the fat and a constant temperature is maintained throughout the cooking process.\n\nBroasting uses a pressure cooker to accelerate the process. The moisture inside the chicken becomes steam and increases the pressure in the cooker, lowering the cooking temperature needed. The steam also cooks the chicken through, but still allows the pieces to be moist and tender while maintaining a crisp coating. Fat is heated in a pressure cooker. Chicken pieces are prepared as described above and then placed in the hot fat. The lid is placed on the pressure cooker, and the chicken pieces are thus fried under pressure.\n\nThe derivative phrases \"country fried\" and \"chicken fried\" often refer to other foods prepared in the manner of fried chicken. Usually, this means a boneless, tenderized piece of meat that has been floured or battered and cooked in any of the methods described above or simply chicken which is cooked outdoors. Chicken fried steak and \"country fried\" boneless chicken breast are two common examples.\n\nThroughout the world, different seasoning and spices are used to augment the flavor of fried chicken. Because of the versatility of fried chicken, it is not uncommon to flavor the chicken's crisp exterior with a variety of spices ranging from spicy to savory. Depending on regional market ubiquity, local spice variations may be labeled as distinct from traditional Southern U.S. flavors, or may appear on menus without notation. With access to chickens suitable for frying broadening on a global scale with the advent of industrialized poultry farming, many localities have added their own mark on fried chicken, tweaking recipes to suit local preferences.\n\n\n\nIn the United States, fried chicken has stereotypically been associated with African-Americans. The reasons for this are various. Chicken dishes were popular among slaves before the Civil War, as chickens were generally the only animals slaves were allowed to raise on their own. Minstrel shows and the film \"The Birth of a Nation\" led to a prevalent stereotype associating African-Americans with fried chicken.\n\nOn two occasions the golfer Tiger Woods has been the target of remarks regarding fried chicken. The first occurred in 1997 when golfer Fuzzy Zoeller said that Woods should avoid choosing fried chicken for the Masters champions' dinner the following year; the second when golfer Sergio García was asked in a press conference in 2013 whether he would invite Woods to dinner during the U.S. Open to settle their ongoing feud. García, a Spaniard who was unaware of the existence of this stereotype in American society, committed a gaffe saying: \"We will have him round every night . . . We will serve fried chicken\", which Woods said was \"wrong, hurtful and clearly inappropriate\". Both Zoeller and García subsequently apologized to Woods.\n\nIn 2009, a KFC in Beijing renamed their restaurant to \"Obama Fried Chicken\" in reference to recently inaugurated President Barack Obama. Despite controversy at the time, the owner refused to change the name back, and the restaurant continues to operate under this name.\n\nAt a dinner during Black History Month, an NBC chef, Leslie Calhoun, served fried chicken. The drummer of the Roots, Questlove, was angered by this and thought it both offensive and ignorant.\n\nIn 2012, Burger King released a commercial which featured Mary J. Blige singing about a crispy chicken wrap. The advertisement was controversial due to the racial stereotypes surrounding fried chicken, and prompted Burger King to remove it from YouTube and Blige to apologize for appearing in it.\n\nIn 2019, Will Hurd, an African-American Congressman, appeared on \"Real Time with Bill Maher\". There, he said that while he was in the CIA he \"was the dude in the back alleys at four o'clock in the morning collecting intelligence on threats to the homeland.\" Bill Maher responded by saying \"That's where you'd collect it, huh? Wow. By the Popeyes Chicken?\" Maher was accused of being racist for making that remark.\n\n"}
{"id": "18617165", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18617165", "title": "Jeonggwa", "text": "Jeonggwa\n\nJeonggwa () is a crispy, chewy \"hangwa\" (traditional Korean confection) with vivid colors and a translucent look. It can be made by boiling sliced fruits, roots, or seeds in honey, \"mullyeot\" (rice syrup), or sugar water, then drying the slices, and optionally shaping them into flowers or other decorative forms. The candied fruits, roots, or seeds may have the similar texture to jam, marmalade, or jelly.\n\nCommon ingredients include yuja, quinces, apricots, lotus roots, radishes, carrots, ginseng, balloon flower roots, gingers, burdock roots, bamboo shoots, and winter melons. If water is boiled first with honey (and often with spices such as cinnamon and ginger) and dried fruit is added later, it is called \"sujeonggwa\" (; \"water \"jeonggwa\"\") and served cold as a beverage.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "18629609", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18629609", "title": "Crossing-the-bridge noodles", "text": "Crossing-the-bridge noodles\n\nCrossing-the-bridge noodles is a rice noodle soup from Yunnan province, China. It is one of the most well-known dishes in Yunnan cuisine.\n\nCrossing-the-bridge noodles has over 100-year history and it was listed as an intangible cultural heritage of Kunming city in 2008 to promote Yunnan food culture. The dish is served with a large bowl of boiling hot broth and the soup ingredients. The soup is made by chicken, pork bone and seasoning, such as Chinese star anise and ginger. Also, using a layer of chicken fat to insulate the soup and therefore keep it warm for longer.These ingredients are separated. The soup ingredients are served on a cutting board or plate and include raw vegetables and lightly cooked meats. Common ingredients include thin slices of turkey, chunks of chicken, chicken skin, strips of bean curd sheets, chives, sprouts and rice noodles. Once added into the broth, it cooks quickly with a layer of melted chicken fat and oil glistening on top. The soup takes a few minutes to cook, and it is then spooned out into small bowls. Jim Thurman of LA Weekly writes that \"with the rice noodles and fresh chicken, it's reminiscent of an extremely subtle version of Vietnamese pho ga [chicken pho]. Which shouldn't surprise anyone, as Yunnan shares a border with Vietnam.\"\n\nOne story that has gained traction begins with a scholar who was studying hard for his imperial exams on a small island. His wife, who would bring him food, found that by the time she had crossed the bridge to the island the soup would be cold and the noodles were soggy. She then decided to load a large earthen pot with boiling broth with a layer of oil on top that would act as insulation and keep the broth warm. The noodles and other ingredients were kept in separate container, and when she arrived, she mixed the two containers together for a warm soup.\n\nAnother claim regarding the origin of the name comes from the way the ingredients are transferred between containers. The process is similar to crossing a bridge between bowls, and hence it is called \"crossing-the-bridge\" noodles.\n\nThere are reportedly many other variations on the origin of the name.\n\nThe main ingredient of the noodles is rice. Rice vermicelli production differs in different regions. In Kunming, Yunnan, there are two varieties: \"dry paste\" or \"sour paste\". The production process differs depending on individual preferences and tastes. \"Sour paste\", as the name suggests, tastes a little sour, but is characterized by a relatively thick and soft rice noodle. The \"dry paste\" does not have the sourness of the sour paste, and the noodle is relatively thin and more rigid. Older people in Kunming think the \"sour paste\" noodles are more authentic. Most people in Yunnan think the Kunming noodle does not satisfy their taste buds, and generally believe Mengzi County and Jianshui County makes better noodles.\n\nNow, as people's tastes change, all kinds of noodle varieties are flooding onto the market. Kunming people now do not necessarily pick a \"dry paste\" or \"sour paste.\" At present, people prefer the more efficient, slippery \"water-washed rice noodle\" and \"purple rice noodle\", one that is mixed with purple rice.\n\nThe development of Crossing the Bridge Noodles has changed people's eating habits over the years, especially breakfasts. Generally in street markets, the hot fresh rice noodle is put into a bowl of boiling water for about half a minute and then colored sauce is added to the bowl. This is known as the \"hat\" of the sauce. Crossing the Bridge Noodles served in markets in the morning are usually completed in one minute.\n\nThere are a few franchised restaurants which serve more intricate or elaborate Crossing the Bridge Noodle dishes. Normally Crossing the Bridge Noodles are ordered in a set. A set of bridge noodle will cost 10 to 50 Yuan. Ordering the Crossing the Bridge Noodles with more ingredients will command higher prices.\n\nThe general ingredients of \"guoqiao mixian\" include: \n\nCrossing-the-bridge noodles are generally served first with a bowl of boiling hot soup. The attendants will then be on the other side of the bowl and put the ingredients into the bowl, generally in order from raw to cooked: meat first, then quail eggs, and then vegetables. Finally, they perform the noodle \"crossing\" with chopsticks and the dish is ready to be consumed. The amount of oil, chili, vinegar, and soy sauce one puts in the bowl varies according to personal taste.\n\n"}
{"id": "18635846", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18635846", "title": "Prabhupāda", "text": "Prabhupāda\n\nPrabhupāda, (alternative spelling: Prabhupada, Prabhupad) (eng) প্রভুপাদ (ben) is a Bengali word originating from the language Sanskrit meaning, \"an honorary title\" or, \"a title used before or after the name of Vaishnava religious teachers\". Since Medieval Bengali Literature period \"prabhu-pāda\" denotes lotus feet of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Its figurative meaning is \"one who has taken shelter at the lotus feet of the Lord\" where \"prabhu\" literally means \"Lord\", and \"pāda\" means \"taking shelter of.\" It also means \"he who sits at the master's feet\".\n\n\"Prabhupāda\" is a joined word by the words 'prabhu' and 'pāda', where the word prabhu literally means master or lord, God, saint, person with high spiritual esteem, or leader and the word pāda literally means feet or leg, root.\n"}
{"id": "18640974", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18640974", "title": "Uniform tilings in hyperbolic plane", "text": "Uniform tilings in hyperbolic plane\n\nIn hyperbolic geometry, a uniform (regular, quasiregular or semiregular) hyperbolic tiling is an edge-to-edge filling of the hyperbolic plane which has regular polygons as faces and is vertex-transitive (transitive on its vertices, isogonal, i.e. there is an isometry mapping any vertex onto any other). It follows that all vertices are congruent, and the tiling has a high degree of rotational and translational symmetry.\n\nUniform tilings can be identified by their vertex configuration, a sequence of numbers representing the number of sides of the polygons around each vertex. For example, 7.7.7 represents the heptagonal tiling which has 3 heptagons around each vertex. It is also regular since all the polygons are the same size, so it can also be given the Schläfli symbol {7,3}.\n\nUniform tilings may be regular (if also face- and edge-transitive), quasi-regular (if edge-transitive but not face-transitive) or semi-regular (if neither edge- nor face-transitive). For right triangles (\"p\" \"q\" 2), there are two regular tilings, represented by Schläfli symbol {\"p\",\"q\"} and {\"q\",\"p\"}.\n\nThere are an infinite number of uniform tilings based on the Schwarz triangles (\"p\" \"q\" \"r\") where  +  +  < 1, where \"p\", \"q\", \"r\" are each orders of reflection symmetry at three points of the fundamental domain triangle – the symmetry group is a hyperbolic triangle group.\n\nEach symmetry family contains 7 uniform tilings, defined by a Wythoff symbol or Coxeter-Dynkin diagram, 7 representing combinations of 3 active mirrors. An 8th represents an alternation operation, deleting alternate vertices from the highest form with all mirrors active.\n\nFamilies with \"r\" = 2 contain regular hyperbolic tilings, defined by a Coxeter group such as [7,3], [8,3], [9,3], ... [5,4], [6,4], ...\n\nHyperbolic families with \"r\" = 3 or higher are given by (\"p\" \"q\" \"r\") and include (4 3 3), (5 3 3), (6 3 3) ... (4 4 3), (5 4 3), ... (4 4 4)...\n\nHyperbolic triangles (\"p\" \"q\" \"r\") define compact uniform hyperbolic tilings. In the limit any of \"p\", \"q\" or \"r\" can be replaced by ∞ which defines a paracompact hyperbolic triangle and creates uniform tilings with either infinite faces (called apeirogons) that converge to a single ideal point, or infinite vertex figure with infinitely many edges diverging from the same ideal point.\n\nMore symmetry families can be constructed from fundamental domains that are not triangles.\n\nSelected families of uniform tilings are shown below (using the Poincaré disk model for the hyperbolic plane). Three of them – (7 3 2), (5 4 2), and (4 3 3) – and no others, are \"minimal\" in the sense that if any of their defining numbers is replaced by a smaller integer the resulting pattern is either Euclidean or spherical rather than hyperbolic; conversely, any of the numbers can be increased (even to infinity) to generate other hyperbolic patterns.\n\nEach uniform tiling generates a dual uniform tiling, with many of them also given below.\n\nThere are infinitely many (\"p\" \"q\" 2) triangle group families. This article shows the regular tiling up to \"p\", \"q\" = 8, and uniform tilings in 12 families: (7 3 2), (8 3 2), (5 4 2), (6 4 2), (7 4 2), (8 4 2), (5 5 2), (6 5 2) (6 6 2), (7 7 2), (8 6 2), and (8 8 2).\n\nThe simplest set of hyperbolic tilings are regular tilings {\"p\",\"q\"}, which exist in a matrix with the regular polyhedra and Euclidean tilings. The regular tiling {\"p\",\"q\"} has a dual tiling {\"q\",\"p\"} across the diagonal axis of the table. Self-dual tilings {2,2}, {3,3}, {4,4}, {5,5}, etc. pass down the diagonal of the table.\nThe (7 3 2) triangle group, Coxeter group [7,3], orbifold (*732) contains these uniform tilings:\nThe (8 3 2) triangle group, Coxeter group [8,3], orbifold (*832) contains these uniform tilings:\nThe (5 4 2) triangle group, Coxeter group [5,4], orbifold (*542) contains these uniform tilings:\nThe (6 4 2) triangle group, Coxeter group [6,4], orbifold (*642) contains these uniform tilings. Because all the elements are even, each uniform dual tiling one represents the fundamental domain of a reflective symmetry: *3333, *662, *3232, *443, *222222, *3222, and *642 respectively. As well, all 7 uniform tiling can be alternated, and those have duals as well.\nThe (7 4 2) triangle group, Coxeter group [7,4], orbifold (*742) contains these uniform tilings:\nThe (8 4 2) triangle group, Coxeter group [8,4], orbifold (*842) contains these uniform tilings. Because all the elements are even, each uniform dual tiling one represents the fundamental domain of a reflective symmetry: *4444, *882, *4242, *444, *22222222, *4222, and *842 respectively. As well, all 7 uniform tiling can be alternated, and those have duals as well.\nThe (5 5 2) triangle group, Coxeter group [5,5], orbifold (*552) contains these uniform tilings:\nThe (6 5 2) triangle group, Coxeter group [6,5], orbifold (*652) contains these uniform tilings:\nThe (6 6 2) triangle group, Coxeter group [6,6], orbifold (*662) contains these uniform tilings:\nThe (8 6 2) triangle group, Coxeter group [8,6], orbifold (*862) contains these uniform tilings.\nThe (7 7 2) triangle group, Coxeter group [7,7], orbifold (*772) contains these uniform tilings:\nThe (8 8 2) triangle group, Coxeter group [8,8], orbifold (*882) contains these uniform tilings:\nThere are infinitely many general triangle group families (\"p\" \"q\" \"r\"). This article shows uniform tilings in 9 families: (4 3 3), (4 4 3), (4 4 4), (5 3 3), (5 4 3), (5 4 4), (6 3 3), (6 4 3), and (6 4 4).\n\nThe (4 3 3) triangle group, Coxeter group [(4,3,3)], orbifold (*433) contains these uniform tilings. Without right angles in the fundamental triangle, the Wythoff constructions are slightly different. For instance in the (4,3,3) triangle family, the \"snub\" form has six polygons around a vertex and its dual has hexagons rather than pentagons. In general the vertex figure of a snub tiling in a triangle (\"p\",\"q\",\"r\") is p. 3.q.3.r.3, being 4.3.3.3.3.3 in this case below.\n\nThe (4 4 3) triangle group, Coxeter group [(4,4,3)], orbifold (*443) contains these uniform tilings. \nThe (4 4 4) triangle group, Coxeter group [(4,4,4)], orbifold (*444) contains these uniform tilings. \nThe (5 3 3) triangle group, Coxeter group [(5,3,3)], orbifold (*533) contains these uniform tilings.\n\nThe (5 4 3) triangle group, Coxeter group [(5,4,3)], orbifold (*543) contains these uniform tilings.\n\nThe (5 4 4) triangle group, Coxeter group [(5,4,4)], orbifold (*544) contains these uniform tilings.\n\nThe (6 3 3) triangle group, Coxeter group [(6,3,3)], orbifold (*633) contains these uniform tilings.\n\nThe (6 4 3) triangle group, Coxeter group [(6,4,3)], orbifold (*643) contains these uniform tilings.\n\nThe (6 4 4) triangle group, Coxeter group [(6,4,4)], orbifold (*644) contains these uniform tilings.\n\nFor a table of all uniform hyperbolic tilings with fundamental domains (\"p\" \"q\" \"r\"), where 2 ≤ \"p\",\"q\",\"r\" ≤ 8.\n\nQuadrilateral fundamental domains also exist in the hyperbolic plane, with the *3222 orbifold ([∞,3,∞] Coxeter notation) as the smallest family. There are 9 generation locations for uniform tiling within quadrilateral domains. The vertex figure can be extracted from a fundamental domain as 3 cases (1) Corner (2) Mid-edge, and (3) Center. When generating points are corners adjacent to order-2 corners, degenerate {2} digon faces at those corners exist but can be ignored. Snub and alternated uniform tilings can also be generated (not shown) if a vertex figure contains only even-sided faces.\n\nCoxeter diagrams of quadrilateral domains are treated as a degenerate tetrahedron graph with 2 of 6 edges labeled as infinity, or as dotted lines. A logical requirement of at least one of two parallel mirrors being active limits the uniform cases to 9, and other ringed patterns are not valid.\n\nThere are infinitely many triangle group families including infinite orders. This article shows uniform tilings in 9 families: (∞ 3 2), (∞ 4 2), (∞ ∞ 2), (∞ 3 3), (∞ 4 3), (∞ 4 4), (∞ ∞ 3), (∞ ∞ 4), and (∞ ∞ ∞).\n\nThe ideal (∞ 3 2) triangle group, Coxeter group [∞,3], orbifold (*∞32) contains these uniform tilings:\n\nThe ideal (∞ 42) triangle group, Coxeter group [∞,4], orbifold (*∞42) contains these uniform tilings:\nThe ideal (∞ 5 2) triangle group, Coxeter group [∞,5], orbifold (*∞52) contains these uniform tilings:\nThe ideal (∞ ∞ 2) triangle group, Coxeter group [∞,∞], orbifold (*∞∞2) contains these uniform tilings:\nThe ideal (∞ 3 3) triangle group, Coxeter group [(∞,3,3)], orbifold (*∞33) contains these uniform tilings. \nThe ideal (∞ 4 3) triangle group, Coxeter group [(∞,4,3)], orbifold (*∞43) contains these uniform tilings:\nThe ideal (∞ 4 4) triangle group, Coxeter group [(∞,4,4)], orbifold (*∞44) contains these uniform tilings. \nThe ideal (∞ ∞ 3) triangle group, Coxeter group [(∞,∞,3)], orbifold (*∞∞3) contains these uniform tilings. \nThe ideal (∞ ∞ 4) triangle group, Coxeter group [(∞,∞,4)], orbifold (*∞∞4) contains these uniform tilings. \nThe ideal (∞ ∞ ∞) triangle group, Coxeter group [(∞,∞,∞)], orbifold (*∞∞∞) contains these uniform tilings. \nFor a table of all uniform hyperbolic tilings with fundamental domains (\"p\" \"q\" \"r\"), where 2 ≤ \"p\",\"q\",\"r\" ≤ 8, and one or more as ∞.\n\n"}
{"id": "18643947", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18643947", "title": "Clontarf (whiskey)", "text": "Clontarf (whiskey)\n\nClontarf 1014 is a triple distilled Irish whiskey produced by the Clontarf Whiskey Company, a subsidiary of Castle Brands Inc. Originally called \"Clontarf,\" the whiskey takes its name from the Battle of Clontarf in 1014 in which Brian Boru, the High King of Ireland, defeated an army of Vikings.\n\nThe brand has launched several marketing initiatives, including one in 2008 and most recently in 2011, when new packaging was released to highlight the 1000 year anniversary of the battle of Clontarf. Clontarf 1014 is 40%abv.\n\nClontarf 1014 is a blended Irish whiskey produced in County Cork, Ireland. It is triple distilled using a combination of grains and aged in bourbon barrels.\n\nClontarf 1014 also produces a single malt, as well as a reserve that is a blend of single malt and grain whiskey. All three varieties are available in the Clontarf 1014 Trinity Collection. However, only the blended whiskey is available on the American market. The reserve and the single malt are available in select European countries.\n\nThe Clontarf 1014 single malt has generally outperformed its Reserve counterpart at international spirit ratings competitions. The single malt received a score of 85-89 from Wine Enthusiast in 2005 (vs. 80-84 for the Reserve). In the same time period, the single malt received a gold medal from the San Francisco World Spirits Competition, besting the silver medal earned by the Reserve.\n\nIn 2008, Clontarf 1014 Irish Whiskey received a 90 rating from the Beverage Tasting Institute, as well as a “Best Buy” award. It was described as “as spot on Irish blend with a lot of character.” \n\n\n"}
{"id": "18656205", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18656205", "title": "Floats (drink)", "text": "Floats (drink)\n\nFloats were a beverage line introduced by the Dr Pepper Snapple in January 2008. Two flavors were available, A&W Float and Sunkist Float. The purpose of the concept was to mimic the flavor of an ice cream float of a given soda. Thus, the A&W flavor was intended to taste like a root beer float, while the latter is comparable to an orange creamsicle or Sunkist float.\n\nThe drinks were creamy in nature and contained little carbonation, and no caffeine. Ingredients included skim milk, cream, and nitrous oxide to create foam. While it was recommended that they be served chilled, refrigeration of Floats is not mandatory. Available in 11.5-ounce, vintage soda-shop-inspired glass bottles with twist-off tops, Floats were sold at major US retail, grocery, and convenience stores.\n\nThe product's first press release was issued on January 2, 2008, which included bottle design photos, suggested retail prices, and other information. \n\nIn the press release, Andrew Springate, vice president of marketing, stated:\n\n"}
{"id": "18660897", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18660897", "title": "Seep (hydrology)", "text": "Seep (hydrology)\n\nA seep or flush is a moist or wet place where water, usually groundwater, reaches the earth's surface from an underground aquifer. \n\nSeeps are usually not of sufficient volume to be flowing beyond their above-ground location. They are part of the limnology-geomorphology system. Like a higher volume spring, the water is only from underground sources. Seeps mostly occur in lower elevation areas because water runs downhill, but can happen higher up if the groundwater present is abundant enough. Along with natural seeps, man made seeps can occur by digging anywhere where there is wet ground. This method can be useful for survival purposes and helps the local wildlife by adding another water source to the area.\n\nSeeps often form a puddle, and are important for small wildlife, bird, and butterfly habitat and moisture needs. When they support mud-puddling many butterfly (\"Lepidoptera\") species can obtain nutrients such as salts and amino acids, including some types that are endemic endangered species.\n\nSeep is often used in environmental sciences to define an exfiltration zone (seepage zone) where contaminated water, e.g., from waste dumps, leaves a waste system area.\n\nSeeps are often important smaller wildlife water sources, and indicated by lower riparian vegetation.\n\nSeeps can also contribute to streams. If a stream is flowing below a water table then the stream receives contributions from the ground water via seepage. This allows for a drainage of the ground water along with creating a more substantial stream to flow. The seep could be especially effective during a rain less period of the area in which the seep can actually prolong the stream’s flow by adding water from the groundwater.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "18673084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18673084", "title": "Douzhi", "text": "Douzhi\n\nDouzhi (; also called mung bean milk) is a fermented dish from Beijing cuisine. It is similar to soy milk, but made from mung beans. It is a by-product of cellophane noodle production. It is generally slightly sour, with an egg-like smell.\n\n"}
{"id": "18673780", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18673780", "title": "Montauk Monster", "text": "Montauk Monster\n\nThe \"Montauk Monster\" was an animal carcass, thought to be a raccoon, that washed ashore on a beach near the business district of Montauk, New York in July 2008. The identity of the creature and the veracity of stories surrounding it have been the subject of controversy and speculation. It is not known what happened to the carcass; it was said to have mysteriously disappeared.\n\nThe story began on July 23, 2008, with an article in the newspaper \"The Independent\". Jenna Hewitt, 26, of Montauk, and three friends said that they found the creature on July 12 at the Ditch Plains beach, two miles east of the district. The beach is a popular surfing spot at Rheinstein Estate Park owned by the town of East Hampton. Jenna Hewitt was quoted:\n\nHer color photograph of the creature ran in black and white under the headline \"The Hound of Bonacville,\" a take-off on the name Bonackers, which refers to the natives of East Hampton, and \"The Hound of the Baskervilles\" by Sir Arthur Conan Doyle. The light-hearted article speculated that the creature might be a turtle or some mutant experiment from the Plum Island Animal Disease Center. It then noted that Larry Penny, the East Hampton Natural Resources Director, had concluded that it was a raccoon with its upper jaw missing. There were rumors that the carcass had been taken away from the site. A local newspaper quoted an anonymous resident who claimed that the animal was only the size of a cat, and that it had decomposed to a skeleton by the time of the press coverage. She would not identify its location for inspection. Hewitt claimed that \"a guy took it and put it in the woods in his backyard\", but would not say who or where. Her father denied that his daughter was keeping the body's location a secret.\n\nHewitt and her friends were interviewed on Plum-TV, a local public-access television show. Alanna Navitski, an employee of Evolutionary Media Group in Los Angeles, California, passed a photo of the creature to Anna Holmes at Jezebel, claiming that a friend's sister saw the monster in Montauk. Holmes then passed it along to Gawker Media website Gawker.com which gave it wide attention on July 29 under the headline \"Dead Monster Washes Ashore in Montauk\".\n\nCryptozoologist Loren Coleman at Cryptomundo first coined the name the \"Montauk Monster\" on July 29, 2008. The nickname was disseminated globally on the Internet in the following days. Photographs were widely circulated via email and weblogs, and the national media picked up on it raising speculation about the creature. The potential urban legend stature of the Montauk Monster was noted by Snopes.\n\nThe monster has been discussed on \"Conspiracy Theory with Jesse Ventura\". On August 4, 2011 the Montauk Monster was featured on the second episode of the third season of \"Ancient Aliens\", titled \"Aliens and Monsters\".\n\nInitial media reports included speculation that the Montauk Monster might have been a turtle without its shell — although turtles' shells are fused with the spine and cannot be removed in this way — a dog, a large rodent, or a science experiment from the nearby government animal testing facility, the Plum Island Animal Disease Center.\n\nWilliam Wise, director of Stony Brook University's Living Marine Resources Institute, inspected the photo along with a colleague; they deemed the creature a fake, although Wise's \"next-best guess\" was that the creature could be a diseased dog or coyote which had \"been in the sea for a while\". Wise discounted the following general possibilities:\nPalaeozoologist Darren Naish studied the photograph and concluded from the corpse's visible dentition, skull shape, and front paws that the creature was a raccoon, with its odd appearance merely a byproduct of decomposition and water action removing most of the animal's hair and some of its flesh. Naish disagreed with the idea that the legs were disproportionately long for a raccoon, providing an illustration of a raccoon's body superimposed over the corpse in the photograph. Jeff Corwin also identified the carcass as that of a raccoon in a Fox News interview.\n\nIn a 2009 episode of \"Monster Quest\", cryptozoologist Loren Coleman examined a latex replica of the Montauk Monster's remains and similarly concluded that it was the remains of a raccoon, due to similar body structures and skull shape.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "18681092", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18681092", "title": "Velhote", "text": "Velhote\n\nVelhote is a typical dessert of the parish of Valadares, Vila Nova de Gaia.\nVelhotes were baked for the first time in the 1880s by Maria Francisca da Silva - \"A Braguesa\" (a lady, who came from Braga) and soon became popular. Only a few of velhotes' history is known, but the legend says that when king Carlos I and Queen Amélie of Orleans came to Porto, they ate velhotes.\n\nVelhotes are a kind of sweet bread with sugar and cinnamon and are typically served on Saturdays and by the time of Sr. dos Aflitos, Valadares' most important religious feast.\n\nThe original recipe included flour, sugar, eggs, cinnamon, lemon juice, yeast and saffron, but the way of baking this sweet bread has changed a lot since the 19th century.\n\nThere is a \"confraria gastronómica\" (gastronomic brotherhood) in Valadares (Confraria Gastronómica do Velhote) which intends to dignify and spread the existence of \"Velhote\" as a typical sweet.\n\n"}
{"id": "18692640", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18692640", "title": "Imperial (beer)", "text": "Imperial (beer)\n\nImperial (Cerveza Imperial) is a Costa Rican brand of beer, manufactured by the Florida Ice & Farm Company (FIFCO). Imperial, a lager, was first produced by the Ortega brewery in 1924 and is the most popular beer in Costa Rica. It has spun off \"Imperial Light\" and \"Imperial Silver\". FIFCO produces other beers including its \"Pilsen\", \"Bavaria\", and \"Rock Ice\" brands.\n\nIts logo was designed by Enrique Hangen and Wolfgang Hangen, who, at the time, were the owners of the advertising agency \"Casa Gráfica\", the brothers also did the logo for others costarican beers, such as Pilsen and Bavaria. The inspiration for this logos were from their native country, Germany. \n\nImperial is also known by Costa Ricans as \"Aguila\" or \"Aguilita\", which translates into English as \"Eagle\" or \"Little Eagle\" in reference to its logo, which is the Imperial Eagle used in European heraldry.\n\nAdvertisement has been managed by GarnierBBDO.\n\nCalories-150 \n<br>\nCarbohydrates-13.845 grams \n<br>\nProtein-3.59 grams \n<br>\nStyle-Dortmunder Lager\n<br>\nAlcohol Content-4.5% by volume \n<br>\nIBU-16.5\n\n"}
{"id": "18706748", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18706748", "title": "Polvorón", "text": "Polvorón\n\nA polvorón (From \"polvo\", the Spanish word for powder, or dust; Cebuano: polboron; ) is a type of heavy, soft, and very crumbly Spanish shortbread made of flour, sugar, milk, and nuts (especially almonds). They are mostly produced in Andalusia, where there are about 70 factories that are part of a syndicate that produces polvorones and mantecados. Under the name \"mantecados\", these sweets are a traditional preparation of other areas of the Iberian Peninsula as well.\n\nPolvorones are popular holiday delicacies in all of Spain as well as its former colonies in Latin America and the Philippines. Traditionally, they were prepared from September to January but are now available all year round. Polvorones were brought to Spain by the Arabs and there is thus a very possible Levantine origin, based on a similar sweet known as \"ghurayba\".\n\nMantecado is a name for a variety of Spanish shortbreads that includes the \"polvorón\". Often both names are synonymous, but not all \"mantecados\" are \"polvorones\". The name \"mantecado\" comes from \"manteca\", usually the fat of Iberian pig (\"cerdo iberico\"), with which they are made, while the name \"polvorón\" is based on the fact that these cakes crumble easily into a kind of dust in the hand or the mouth.\n\nIn Cuba and Puerto Rico, \"mantecado\" is an ice cream and in Spain it may be also the name given to a kind of sweet sherbet. In the Philippines, \"mantecado\" is a popular traditional ice cream flavour, characterised as a mixture of vanilla and butter. It was served during the 29 September 1898 luncheon banquet that followed the Malolos Congress' ratification of the Philippine Declaration of Independence in June that year.\n\nIn Cuba, it is one of the most common flavors of ice cream. Cuba, being the Latin American country in the Caribbean where Spain had the most interest and influence, has adapted the flavors of mantecado or polvorones from Spain into a delicious and beloved flavor for Cuban ice cream. Known worldwide for the delicious flavoring, what some might call a Latin Vanilla, this Cuban flavor has influenced ice cream flavors made in other Latin American places like in Puerto Rico.\n\nThe Filipino version of polvorón (spelled locally as pulburon, pulboron, or polboron) uses a large amount of powdered milk which is left dry, as well as toasted flour, sugar, and butter or margarine instead of lard. A number of local variants on the traditional \"polvorón\" recipe have been made. Well-known variants include \"polvorón\" with \"kasuy\" (cashew nut), with \"pinipig\" (pounded and toasted young green rice, similar to crisped rice) and with \"malunggay\" leaves. Strawberry, chocolate-coated, \"ube\" (purple yam), peanut, and cookies and cream flavoured \"polvorón\" also exist.\n\nPolvorones are a common Christmas dessert in Spain. Today, there are other options for the fat used in the sweet other than pig fat, like cow fat, as well as vegetarian polvorones and mantecados made with olive oil.\n\nSometimes called Pan de Polvo, the sweet is made with anise in the south Texas region.\n\n"}
{"id": "18707192", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18707192", "title": "Baklava", "text": "Baklava\n\nBaklava (, , or ; ) is a rich, sweet dessert pastry made of layers of filo filled with chopped nuts and sweetened and held together with syrup or honey. It is characteristic of the cuisines of the Levant, the Caucasus, Balkans, Maghreb, and of Central and West Asia.\n\nThe word \"baklava\" is first attested in English in 1650, a borrowing from Ottoman Turkish . The name baklava is used in many languages with minor phonetic and spelling variations.\n\nHistorian Paul D. Buell argues that the word \"baklava\" may come from the Mongolian root ' 'to tie, wrap up, pile up' composed with the Turkic verbal ending \"-v\"; baγla- itself in Mongolian is a Turkic loanword. Armenian linguist Sevan Nişanyan considers its oldest known forms (pre-1500) to be \"baklağı\" and \"baklağu\", and labels it as being of Proto-Turkic origin. Another form of the word is also recorded in Persian, ('). Though the suffix \"-vā\" might suggest a Persian origin, the \"baqla-\" part does not appear to be Persian and remains of unknown origin.\n\nThe Arabic name \" likely originates from Turkish, though a folk etymology, unsupported by Wehr's dictionary, connects it to Arabic 'bean'.\n\nAlthough the history of baklava is not well documented, its current form was probably developed in the imperial kitchens of the Topkapı Palace in Istanbul. The Sultan presented trays of baklava to the Janissaries every 15th of the month of Ramadan in a ceremonial procession called the \".\n\nThere are three proposals for the pre-Ottoman roots of baklava: the Roman placenta cake, as developed through Byzantine cuisine,\n\nThe oldest (2nd century BCE) recipe that resembles a similar dessert is the honey covered baked layered-dough dessert ' of Roman times, which Patrick Faas identifies as the origin of baklava: \"The Greeks and the Turks still argue over which dishes were originally Greek and which Turkish. Baklava, for example, is claimed by both countries. Greek and Turkish cuisine both built upon the cookery of the Byzantine Empire, which was a continuation of the cooking of the Roman Empire. Roman cuisine had borrowed a great deal from the ancient Greeks, but ' (and hence baklava) had a Latin, not a Greek, origin—please note that the conservative, anti-Greek Cato left us this recipe.\"\n\nAndrew Dalby identifies this, and surrounding dessert recipes in Cato, as coming from a \"Greek tradition\" and cites Antiphanes (fl. 3rd century BC) as quoted by Athenaeus. \n\nSeveral sources state that this Roman dessert continued to evolve during the Byzantine (Eastern Roman) Empire into modern baklava. In antiquity the Greek word ' () was also used for Latin ', and the American scholar Speros Vryonis describes one type of plakous, koptoplakous (Byzantine Greek: κοπτοπλακοῦς), as a \"Byzantine favorite\" and \"the same as the Turkish baklava\", as do other writers. Indeed, the Roman word \"placenta\" () is used today on the island of Lesbos in Greece to describe a baklava-type dessert of layered pastry leaves containing crushed nuts that is baked and then covered in honey.\n\nMuhammad bin Hasan al-Baghdadi was a compiler from the Abbasid period who described lauzinaq, a dessert said by some to have been similar to baklava, though others say it was not like baklava. \"Lauzinaq,\" which derives from the Aramaic word for almond, refers to small pieces of almond paste wrapped in very thin pastry (\"as thin as grasshoppers' wings\") and drenched in syrup. Al-Baghdadi's cookbook, \",\" was written in 1226 (in today's Iraq) and was based on a collection of 9th century Persian-inspired recipes. According to Gil Marks, Middle Eastern pastry makers developed the process of layering the ingredients; he asserts that \"some scholars said they were influenced by Mongols or Turks\". The only original manuscript of al-Baghdadi's book survives at the Library in Istanbul (Turkey) and according to Charles Perry, \"for centuries, it had been the favorite cookbook of the Turks,\" though Perry also notes that the manuscript has no recipe for baklava. A further 260 recipes had been added to the original by Turkish compilers at an unknown date retitling it as \"\", and two of its known three copies can be found now at the Topkapı Palace Library in Istanbul. Eventually, Muhammad ibn Mahmud al-Shirwani, the physician of the Ottoman Sultan Murad II prepared a Turkish translation of the book, adding around 70 contemporary recipes.\n\nAnother recipe for a similar dessert is güllaç, a dessert found in the Turkish cuisine and considered by some as the origin of baklava. It consists of layers of filo dough that are put one by one in warmed up milk with sugar. It is served with walnut and fresh pomegranate and generally eaten during Ramadan. The first known documentation of ' is attested in a food and health manual, written in 1330 that documents Mongol foods called Yinshan Zhengyao (飮膳正要, \"Important Principles of Food and Drink\"), written by Hu Sihui, an ethnic Mongol court dietitian of the Yuan dynasty. Uzbek cuisine has ', ' or ' or in Tatar ', which are sweet and salty savories (') prepared with 10–12 layers of dough.\n\nThere are also some similarities between baklava and the Ancient Greek desserts ' (), ' (), and ' () found in book XIV of the . However, the recipe there is for a filling of nuts and honey, with a top and bottom layer of honey and ground sesame similar to modern ' or ', and no dough, certainly not a flaky dough.\n\nBaklava is normally prepared in large pans. Many layers of filo dough, separated with melted butter and vegetable oil, are laid in the pan. A layer of chopped nuts—typically walnuts or pistachios, but hazelnuts are also sometimes used—is placed on top, then more layers of filo. Most recipes have multiple layers of filo and nuts, though some have only top and bottom pastry.\n\nBefore baking (, 30 minutes), the dough is cut into regular pieces, often parallelograms (lozenge-shaped), triangles, diamonds or rectangles. After baking, a syrup, which may include honey, rosewater, or orange flower water is poured over the cooked baklava and allowed to soak in.\n\nBaklava is usually served at room temperature, often garnished with ground nuts.\n\nIn Turkey, baklava is traditionally made by filling between the layers of dough with pistachios, walnuts or almonds (in some parts of the Aegean Region). In the Black Sea Region hazelnuts are commonly used as a filling for baklava. Hazelnuts are also used as a filling for the Turkish dessert \"Sütlü Nuriye\", a lighter version of the dessert which substitutes milk for the simple syrup used in traditional baklava recipes.\n\"Şöbiyet\" is a variation that includes fresh cream in the filling, in addition to the traditional nuts.\n\nThe city of Gaziantep in southeast Turkey is famous for its pistachio baklava. The dessert was introduced to Gaziantep in 1871 by Çelebi Güllü, who had learned the recipe from a chef in Damascus. In 2008, the Turkish patent office registered a geographical indication for Antep Baklava, and in 2013, or was registered as a Protected Geographical Indication by the European Commission. In many parts of Turkey, baklava is often topped with or ice cream.\n\nArmenian ' is spiced with cinnamon and cloves. Greek-style baklava is supposed to be made with 33 dough layers, referring to the years of Christ's life. In Azerbaijani cuisine ', made with walnuts or almonds, is usually cut in a rhombus shape and is traditionally served during the spring holiday of . In the cuisine of Bosnia \"Ruzice\" is the name of the regional variant of baklava. In Crimean Tatar cuisine, the \"\" is their variant of baklava. In Lebanese, Syrian, Jordanian, Iraqi, Egyptian, Israeli and Palestinian cuisines, baklava prepared from phyllo dough sheets, butter, walnuts and sugar syrup is cut into lozenge-shaped pieces. In the Maghreb, mainly Libyan, Tunisian, Algerian and Moroccan cuisines, the pastry was brought (along many others) by the Ottomans, and is prepared differently depending on the regions and cities.\n\nIn Iranian cuisine, a drier version of baklava is cooked and presented in smaller diamond-shaped cuts flavored with rose water. The cities of Yazd and Qazvin are famous for their baklava, which is widely distributed in Iran. Persian baklava uses a combination of chopped almonds and pistachios spiced with cardamom and a rose water-scented syrup and is lighter than other Middle Eastern versions.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "18709311", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18709311", "title": "Rolled oyster", "text": "Rolled oyster\n\nIt is a baseball-sized seafood dish that is found only in and around Louisville, Kentucky. It consists of three raw oysters dipped in an egg-milk cornmeal batter called \"pastinga\", rolled in cracker crumbs (hence the name), and deep fried. They were first served by Italian immigrant Phillip Mazzoni and his brothers in the late 19th century as a free giveaway to their saloon patrons with a purchased beer or whiskey. It is unknown if rolled oysters were actually invented by the Mazzonis, or if the recipe was brought over from Italy with them. During prohibition, Mazzoni's remained open by selling these oysters in their new restaurant and it became a popular food item all over town. Today, most seafood restaurants and fish fries in the Louisville area will have their own version of these on their menus.\n\n"}
{"id": "18709546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18709546", "title": "Medianoche", "text": "Medianoche\n\nMedianoche (; \"midnight\" in Spanish) is a type of sandwich which originated in Cuba. It is served in many Cuban communities in the United States. It is so named because of the sandwich's popularity as a staple served in Havana's night clubs right around or after midnight.\n\nA \"medianoche\" consists of roast pork, ham, mustard, Swiss cheese, and sweet pickles. It is a close cousin to the Cuban sandwich, the chief difference being that a \"medianoche\" is made on soft, sweet egg dough bread similar to Challah rather than on crustier Cuban bread. Like the Cuban sandwich, the \"medianoche\" is typically warmed in a press before eating.\n\nIn Jeff Lindsay's \"Dexter\" novels, Dexter names the medianoche as his favorite food.\n\n"}
{"id": "18720361", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18720361", "title": "Olympic Truce", "text": "Olympic Truce\n\nThe Olympic Truce is a tradition originating from Ancient Greece that dates back to 776 BC. A \"truce\" (Ancient Greek: ékécheiria, meaning \"laying down of arms\") was announced before and during the Olympic Games to ensure the host city state (Elis) was not attacked and athletes and spectators could travel safely to the Games and peacefully return to their respective countries.\n\nIn 1992, the International Olympic Committee renewed this tradition by calling upon all nations to observe the Truce during the modern Games. The Truce was revived by United Nations Resolution 48/11 of 25 October 1993, as well by the United Nations Millennium Declaration relating to the world peace and security.\n\nIn 1996, the Athens Bid Committee committed to reviving the Olympic Truce and promoting it to the world through the Olympic flame relay. Three years later, the International Olympic Committee announced the establishment of the International Olympic Truce Foundation and the International Olympic Truce Centre in cooperation with Greece. The vision was to protect the interests of athletes and sport, and to promote peaceful principles in modern day. Each host city was encouraged to embrace the meaning and spirit of the Olympic Truce in the planning and staging of the Games.\n\nThrough this global and symbolic concept, the goal of the Olympic Truce movement is to:\n\n\n\nOn 22 April 2011 a Member of the House of Lords - Michael Bates, Baron Bates - began walking over 3000 miles from Olympia to London to highlight the opportunity to bring the Olympic Truce into reality during the 2012 London Summer Games. Walk for Truce, Lord Bates was successful in securing pledges from a number of governments to both sign and implement the Truce, supported on his journey by the British Foreign Office. Lord Bates arrived back in London on February 15, 2012 and continues to lobby for the cause of the Olympic Truce.\n\nThe UK promoted the ideals of the Olympic Truce both domestically, and for the first time internationally. The London Organising Committee of the Olympic and Paralympic Games (LOCOG) organised truce activities in the UK including: \"Get Set for the Olympic Truce\" which encourages young people across the UK to learn about the history of the Olympic Truce, to debate and discuss what the Olympic Truce means to their lives and to undertake an activity to promote peace within their school or community. Materials were promoted to over 20,000 schools registered with Get Set.\n\nTruce Inspire is a ‘truce’ strand of the Inspire programme through which LOCOG specifically looked for projects inspired by the London 2012 Olympic and Paralympic Games which use sport or culture to promote conflict resolution, reconciliation and peace. LOCOG approved a number of projects including: a project led by the University of Ulster which uses sport to support conflict resolution across the education sector; a project providing 200 schools with the opportunity to debate the theme of the Olympic Truce at a Model UN conference; and a project which uses sport to bring together young people from London communities affected by gang rivalry. Cultural Olympiad and the London 2012 Festival organised by LOCOG and the NGO Peace One Day is delivering a truce strand of the Film Nation Shorts project through which 14- to 25-year-olds are invited to create films focused on the truce theme. LOCOG has also partnered with Peace One Day to deliver a series of concerts as part of the London 2012 Festival.\n\nInternational activities were led by the Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO) which together with partners promoted the ideals of the Olympic Truce internationally under the themes of:\n\n\nSpeaking about the FCO's work on the Olympic Truce, Foreign Office Minister Henry Bellingham said\nOn 28 May 2012 during the visit of Foreign Secretary William Hague to Moscow, the UK and Russian foreign ministries (in recognistion of their countries shared roles as Olympic Hosts in 2012 and 2014) agreed to work together to promote and support the ideals of the Olympic Truce.\n\nOn 12 September 2012 FCO Ministers updated Parliament\n\"It was a real honour for the UK to have the responsibility to promote the Olympic truce message. We worked closely on delivering an international response to the Olympic truce, working with the London Organising Committee of the Olympic and Paralympic games, the Department for International Development, the Ministry of Defence and the Department for Culture Media and Sport\".\n\n\"We wanted to show that the UN resolution could be translated into international action. Our diplomatic missions across our network and the FCO in London arranged over 70 events and activities which showed how important the contribution of youth, women and those with disabilities is in promoting peace through sport, culture, education and wider public engagement. While activities took place in every continent, we specifically wanted to bring the Olympic truce to life in conflict affected and fragile countries\".\n\n\"The UK is the first games host to deliver this level of international ambition for the Olympic truce. The UN Secretary-General, in the presence of the International Olympic Committee, recognised the UK’s Olympic truce work on the eve of the opening ceremony of the London 2012 games. Now others are seeking to build on our experience. We are currently sharing our experience with the UN Secretary-General’s Special Adviser’s Office on sport and development for peace, as well as with Russia, which will next take stewardship of the Olympic truce in 2013, ahead of the Sochi winter games in 2014. This level of international interest, paired with our continued engagement, will help cement our legacy of encouraging future games hosts to promote the ideals of the Olympic truce in their own ways\".\n\nThe official Olympic Truce logo is a graphic with three elements: a dove, flames, and the Olympic rings. The meaning behind the logo is as follows:\n\nThe United Nations is in support of the Olympic Truce and before each Summer and Winter Olympic Games, adopts a resolution called \"Building a peaceful and better world through sport and the Olympic ideal\". UN Member States are asked to observe the Olympic Truce, and work towards the settlement of international disagreements by peaceful and diplomatic means. The United Kingdom was the first ever nation to get all 193 UN Member states to sign the Olympic Truce resolution for the 2012 Olympic Games.\n\nUN Support is mainly shown through the resolution. It is also shown by the Solemn Appeals for Truce made by the UN Secretary General and the President of the General Assembly shortly before the Olympic and Winter Olympic Games. The lead office within the UN system is The United Nations Office on Sport for Development and Peace or UNOSDP. The current UN Special Adviser on Sport for Development and Peace is Wilfried Lemke from Bremen, Germany. UNOSDP is situated at the UN Office at Geneva plus a liaison office at UN HQ in New York.\n\nOn 17 October 2011, the international community pledged to observe the Olympic Truce, individually and collectively. For London 2012, the resolution was officially titled “Sport for Peace and Development: Building a Peaceful and Better World through Sport and the Olympic Ideal” and was introduced by LOCOG chairman Sebastian Coe. “The Truce helps to show the world that peace is a possibility,\" he said Monday in New York City. \"It shows the power that sport has to inspire unity, mutual understanding, and respect among different types of people.” Coe exhorted all member states of the UN to respect the ideals of the Truce. “Countries should feel an obligation to respect the Truce because it holds true to the idea that we can coexist without the need for discrimination and fighting,\" he urged. “It gives us something to strive towards outside of the Olympics and the arena of sport.”\n\nThe United Nations website recognizes the truce as \"the cornerstone of the Olympic Games in ancient times\" and the \"longest lasting peace accord in history\".\n\n\n"}
{"id": "18721189", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18721189", "title": "Mami soup", "text": "Mami soup\n\nMami is a noodle soup made with wheat flour noodles, broth and the addition of meat (chicken, beef, pork) or wonton dumplings.\n\nIts creation is generally attributed to Ma Mon Luk, a Chinese immigrant to the Philippines who began selling noodles served with chicken broth in Binondo, Manila in 1920. Ma originally called his dish \"\"gupit\"\", after the Tagalog word for “cut”. Later, Ma decided to call it \"Ma mi\" (), literally meaning, \"Ma’s noodles\". Unfortunately, Ma did not have the name patented. Soon, imitation noodle soups sprouted with a name that was, personally, his.\n\n"}
{"id": "18724093", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18724093", "title": "Curau", "text": "Curau\n\nCurau () is a Brazilian sweet custard-like dessert made from the pressed juice of unripe maize, cooked with milk and sugar.\n\nThe term \"curau\" is used mostly the southern states such as São Paulo, Mato Grosso and Mato Grosso do Sul. It is also called \"corá\" () in Minas Gerais, \"papa-de-milho\" \"corn porridge\" in Rio de Janeiro, and \"canjica\" in the northern half of Brazil (Northeast and North regions).\n\nCurau recipes typically call for about 1/2 to 2 liters of milk and 1 to 3 cups of sugar for 10 ears of unripe maize or sweet corn. Other ingredients may be added, such as a pinch of salt, a tablespoon of butter, etc.. The milk may be replaced in part by coconut milk or condensed milk.\n\nTo prepare the curau, the corn kernels are grated off the ears and put into a cloth bag. The bag is then squeezed while adding the milk little by little, so as to extract as much juice as possible from the ground corn mass. Alternatively, the ground corn and milk may be processed with a blender and then passed through fine sieve.\n\nThe extracted liquid is combined with the sugar and any other ingredients, and thickened to a creamy consistency by cooking on the stove for about 45 minutes (or in the microwave oven for 12–15 minutes), stirring frequently. The cream is then poured into appropriate containers (dessert cups, muffin molds, shallow baking pans, etc.)\n\nThe curau may be served warm or cool (when it acquires a firm custard-like consistency). It is typically dusted with powdered cinnamon.\n\nA giant canjica has been prepared every year since 1999 in the town of Caruaru for the Festa de São João in northeast Brazil; the 2008 issue was 35 meters long and used 4,500 ears of corn.\n\nIn the southern states, the word \"canjica\" is used for a different dessert, made with ripe unground white maize kernels, cooked in milk until soft, and which is called \"mungunzá doce\" in the northern half of Brazil.\n\n"}
{"id": "18742257", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18742257", "title": "Morogo", "text": "Morogo\n\nMorogo or Moroho, also known as wild or African spinach, refers to a group of at least three different dark green leafy vegetables found throughout Southern Africa [cowpea, vegetable amaranth, or spider flower] and harvested for human consumption. It is considered a traditional South African dish and forms an important part of the staple diet in rural communities.\n\nMorogo leaves have a protein content of up to 36%. The ultimate vitamin content is dependent on the age of the plant and method of preparation; the plants contain vitamin A and vitamin C and complement the low levels of calcium, magnesium and iron in maize.\nIn South Africa one of the varieties is known as \"pigweed\" in English, \"hanekam\" in Afrikaans and scientifically, \"Amaranthus sp.\"\n\nAn examination of three widely consumed variants have found that its consumption may lower the risk of vascular-related chronic diseases and type 2 diabetes.\n\nHowever, in some circumstances Morogo may increase the risk of fungal infection, specifically fusariosis, especially among immunocompromised individuals such as those suffering from Aids. A study found high levels of \"Alternaria\" fungi in internal leaf structures and \"Fusarium\" fungi on leaf surfaces. A separate study asserts that Morogo is not a natural host to Fusarium, but may be cross-infected by close proximity to maize crops.\n\n"}
{"id": "18742754", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18742754", "title": "Macaroni soup", "text": "Macaroni soup\n\nMacaroni soup is soup that includes macaroni. The food is a traditional dish in Italy, and is sometimes served with beans, which is known as \"pasta e fagioli\", and was also included in \"Mrs Beeton's Book of Household Management\" where the connection with Italy is mentioned and the dish includes parmesan cheese. In the early 19th century, macaroni soup was one of the most common dishes in Italian inns.\n\nThe soup was discussed as a food to improve the health of poor miners. Weeds can be used in macaroni soup in times of poverty to provide vitamins and minerals. Due to its inexpensive nature, it is often part of the menu in institutions such as schools, hospitals and prisons. Protein such as soya beans can be added to provide nutrition. It was included in a cookbook for schools in 1896. One book suggests using it as a food to comfort distressed mental patients. The dish was served as part of the menu for students in Memorial Hall, Harvard in 1882, where their food was described as looking better than it tastes.\n\nIn the Philippines, a common macaroni soup is known simply as \"sopas\" (\"soup\" in Tagalog). It originated from the American chicken noodle soup. It is made with macaroni, various vegetables and meat (usually chicken), with added evaporated milk. It is regarded as a comfort food and commonly served during cold days or to sick people.\n\nIn Los Angeles it is sometimes served with chilli. The soup is also known in Malaysia, where it is sometimes served with chicken balls.\n\n"}
{"id": "18761098", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18761098", "title": "Rúgbrauð", "text": "Rúgbrauð\n\nRúgbrauð () is an Icelandic straight rye bread. It is traditionally baked in a pot or steamed in special wooden casks by burying it in the ground near a hot spring, in which case it is known as \"hverabrauð\" or \"hot-spring-bread\". Modern \"rúgbrauð\" is usually made in a square baking pan. The bread is crustless, dark and very dense, usually rather sweet, and keeps for a long time. It is often served with butter, mutton pâté, hangikjöt (smoked lamb), or with pickled herring. Dry \"rúgbrauð\" would be ground and mixed with buttermilk to form a kind of porridge. Stale \"rúgbrauð\" is often soaked, then made into \"brauðsúpa\" (bread soup) - that is, simmered with raisins and flavorings (usually lemon) and served hot with whipped cream as a dessert.\n\nExcessive consumption of this bread is said to cause flatulence, earning it its nickname \"þrumari\" which roughly translates as \"thunderbread\" or \"thunderer\".\n\nThere are, however, varieties of the traditional rye bread with wheat and whole grain added to make it less dense, but also called \"rúgbrauð\". These varieties tend to be less heavy than the traditional straight rye variety and more similar to the modern Danish rugbrød or German pumpernickel.\n\nRye, produced in Denmark and exported to Iceland, became the predominant cereal in Icelandic cuisine in the early modern period after a trade monopoly was instituted by the king of Denmark in 1602, remaining in vigor until 1786.\n\n"}
{"id": "18761400", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18761400", "title": "Hangikjöt", "text": "Hangikjöt\n\nHangikjöt (; lit. \"hung meat\") is a traditional festive food in Iceland, served at Christmas.\n\nThis Icelandic smoked lamb, mutton, or horse meat is usually boiled and served either hot or cold in slices, traditionally with potatoes in béchamel sauce and green peas, or in thin slices on bread such as \"flatkaka\" or \"rúgbrauð\" or \"laufabrauð\". It takes its name from the old tradition of smoking food in order to preserve it by hanging it from the rafters of a smoking shed.\n\nSometimes, bits of string are present in the meat, having been tied around the meat to compress it and hold it together as it is being smoked; the strings are not eaten.\n\nThere are several types of hangikjöt. The meat can come from various parts of the sheep, but the most common is the hind legs. A whole leg on the bone, with an adequate layer of fat, is by many considered the best of all, although others prefer the convenience of a boned roll of meat or want most of the fat trimmed off.\n\nIn recent years other types have become available, such as \"tvíreykt\" (\"twice smoked\") hangikjöt, i.e. lamb or mutton that has been smoked for a longer period of time and is more like the old country hangikjöt which often hung high above the kitchen fire for many months. This is usually served raw in thin slices, sometimes in a manner similar to the Italian \"prosciutto\", with melon. Modern commercial hangikjöt is usually fairly lightly smoked. The two main types are either smoked with Icelandic birch or with dried sheep dung.\n\nA recent survey established that around 90% of all Icelanders eat hangikjöt at least once over the holidays.\n\nSmoked Mutton was known as Macon in the UK, but is not common.\n\n"}
{"id": "18762882", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18762882", "title": "Matador (cocktail)", "text": "Matador (cocktail)\n\nThe Matador is a tequila-based cocktail. Less widely known than the margarita, its structure is similarly simple, with three primary ingredients: silver or \"blanco\" tequila, pineapple juice, and lime juice. Its chief coupling of pineapple and a single spirit resembles a Jackhammer, a variant of the Screwdriver which substitutes pineapple juice for orange juice to mix with vodka. Matadors are often presented differently, either in a martini glass or a champagne flute.\n\nThe cocktail combines three Mexican exports: tequila, pineapple and lime. Due to typically high natural sugar content in many pineapple varieties, or use of sweetened commercially produced pineapple juice, additional sweeteners are not usually added.\n\nIn addition to these details, Matador is a commercial brand of tequila, though usage of a specifically branded spirit here is variable, similar to ingredient usage in other cocktails.\n\n"}
{"id": "18768871", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18768871", "title": "Flatkaka", "text": "Flatkaka\n\nFlatkökur, flatkaka (lit. \"flat cake\") or flatbrauð (lit. \"flat bread\") is an Icelandic unleavened rye flatbread. \"Flatkaka\" is soft, round, thin and dark with a characteristic pattern from the pan.\n\nTraditionally, \"flatkaka\" was baked on hot stones or straight on the embers of the fire, later on small but heavy cast iron frying pans, and today, when making \"flatkaka\" at home, people sometimes bake them directly on an electric hot plate to get the desired result. There usually is a difference between home-made \"flatkaka\" and the varieties sold in stores, the latter being somewhat thicker and dryer because of added wheat flour.\n\nIt is assumed that the Icelandic tradition of baking flatbread goes back to the settlement of Iceland in the 9th century. Historically, fjallagrös (Iceland moss, \"Cetraria islandica\") was sometimes used as a supplement because of a lack of grain on the island.\n\n\"Flatkaka\" is usually served cut into halves or quarters, with a topping of butter or mutton pâté, with \"hangikjöt\", smoked salmon or even pickled herring.\n\n"}
{"id": "18779280", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18779280", "title": "Duchess potatoes", "text": "Duchess potatoes\n\nDuchess(e) potatoes () consist of a purée of mashed potato and egg yolk, butter, salt, pepper, and nutmeg, which is forced from a piping bag or hand-moulded into various shapes which are then baked at 245 °C (475 °F) until golden. They are a classic item of French cuisine.\n\n"}
{"id": "18779574", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18779574", "title": "Bombe glacée", "text": "Bombe glacée\n\nA bombe glacée, or simply a bombe in English, is an ice cream dessert frozen in a spherical mould so as to resemble a cannonball, hence the name. Escoffier gives over sixty recipes for \"bombes\" in \"Le Guide culinaire\". A recipe for \"chocolate & meringue bombe\" is given in \"Mary Berry's Complete Cook Book\". The dessert appeared on restaurant menus as early as 1882.\n\nBy extension, the term has been used to refer to any ice cream confection shaped through molding, not necessarily hemispherical. It has also been used to include dishes made with other frozen desserts, such as sherbet, sorbet, or mousse.\n\nThe 1971 James Bond film \"Diamonds Are Forever\" features a 'bombe surprise' in the final scene. Being a Bond film, the dessert filling is actually a bomb.\n\n"}
{"id": "18787352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18787352", "title": "Lechazo", "text": "Lechazo\n\nLechazo is a Spanish dish made from \"cordero lechal\". The meat used is from unweaned lambs, and is similar to veal, or the meat of \"cochinillo\" (Spanish suckling pigs like tostón asado). The province of Castile and León has a distinctive version of lechazo referred to as \"Lechazo de Castilla y Leon\". It is one of the most important dishes of the cuisine of the province of Valladolid. Also, Aranda de Duero is known as the heart of the dish, with numerous restaurants that specialize in lechazo and feature \"hornos de leña\", or wooden stoves, in which the lamb is roasted.\nThe lamb used in lechal must derive all its nutrition from its mothers milk, and must be no more than 35 days old and weigh between 9 and 12 kilograms at the time of slaughter.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "18789382", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18789382", "title": "Albufera sauce", "text": "Albufera sauce\n\nAlbufera sauce (fr. Sauce Albuféra) is a small compound sauce. It has as its base the mother sauce (or leading sauce) velouté. Escoffier gives a recipe in \"Le Guide culinaire\" which consists of a base of Suprême sauce to which is added meat glaze in order to lend the latter an ivory-white tint which characterizes it. It is served chiefly with poultry and sweetbreads. Louis Gabriel Suchet (1770–1826), one of Napoleon's generals and Marshal of France for a time, was named duc d'Albufera after a lake near Valencia, Spain, to mark his victory there during the Peninsular War. Marie-Antoine Carême created several dishes in the duke's honor, including duck, beef, and the sauce that accompanies this chicken.\n"}
{"id": "18827564", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18827564", "title": "Nantua sauce", "text": "Nantua sauce\n\nNantua sauce (French: Sauce Nantua) is a classical French sauce consisting of:\n\n\nIt is named for the city of Nantua, which is known for its crayfish, and the term \"à la Nantua\" is used in classical French cuisine for dishes containing crayfish.\n\nSauce Nantua is the classic accompaniment to \"quenelles de brochet\" (pike dumplings), making \"quenelles Nantua\".\n"}
{"id": "18844035", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18844035", "title": "Venom Energy", "text": "Venom Energy\n\nVenom Energy is an energy drink brand produced and distributed by Keurig Dr Pepper of Plano, Texas. It is one of the few energy drinks that uses a thick aluminum bottle. Venom Energy was released in 2002 in a more typical beverage container and was relaunched in the new aluminum bottle and with a new taste in early 2008.\n\nOriginally known as Elements Energy, but later rebranded after sales began to wane.\n\nSome of the original Elements flavors did survive the rebranding: \nBlack Mamba (Venom), Mango (Infusion), Citrus (Voltage), Strawberry Apple (Atomic), Black Cherry Kiwi (Subzero).\n\nIn 2008, Venom Energy entered into a partnership with the Arena Football League to promote the product during the 2008 playoffs on ESPN and ABC. In addition, Cincinnati Bengals wide receiver Terrell Owens is now a spokesman for the brand. The company also sponsors the Andretti Autosport IndyCar Series team with driver Marco Andretti, Pavel Datsyuk of the Detroit Red Wings, Max Talbot of the Pittsburgh Penguins and Milan Lucic of the Boston Bruins, all from the NHL as well as Jordan Farmar of the New Jersey Nets (NBA) and Lance Berkman of the St. Louis Cardinals (MLB).\n\nVenom Energy contains large doses of taurine, glucuronolactone, and guarana, with L-carnitine, inositol and maltodextrin as additional ingredients. The caffeine content of Venom energy drinks is roughly 162 mg per bottle, or approximately equal to that found in eight ounces of plain Starbucks coffee. \n\nVenom was historically bottled in half-liter aluminum bottles (16.9 fluid ounces). In 2012, Venom downsized the bottles to 16 fluid ounces, the standard size of most other energy drink single-serve cans.\n\n"}
{"id": "18880593", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18880593", "title": "OK Sauce", "text": "OK Sauce\n\nOK Sauce is a brand of brown sauce manufactured in the United Kingdom, first by George Mason & Company and later by Colmans.\n\nOK Sauce was first made in a factory called the Chelsea Works (formerly a swimming pool) in London.\n\nIn 1928 production was transferred to a purpose-built factory to the designs of Percy Sharp, at 265 Merton Road, Southfields, in the London Borough of Wandsworth. The company's official title was George Mason & Co Ltd. However, George Mason left the firm before World War 1 and the company was run by the Cooper family, initially by Percy Cooper, then by his son Rex Cooper as Chairman and MD.\n\nRex's son, Brian, together with Rex's sister Betty Urwin, oversaw the changeover to Colmans. In addition to OK sauce, other sauces and chutneys were made. They also had a satellite factory (called Watersend Condiments) in a converted farm building beside a manor house at Temple Ewell, Dover. This concentrated on horseradish sauce, mint sauce and mint jelly. The factories continued to make sauces until 1969 when the owners of the company sold it off to Reckitt and Colman at Norwich. The products had a Royal Warrant which ceased around the takeover. All production was transferred to Norwich and both factories closed. However, the Art Deco facade of the Southfields building, visible from Merton Road still exists and has been awarded Grade 2 listing status in August 2002.\n\nColmans continues to make OK Sauce and other condiments.\nOK Sauce's main market is today in the Far East and UK domestic Chinese communities. It is a vital ingredient in the Chinese/Canton takeaway OK sauce.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "18893866", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18893866", "title": "Garlic butter", "text": "Garlic butter\n\nGarlic butter, also known as beurre à la bourguignonne, is a compound butter used as a flavouring for \"Escargots à la bourguignonne\". It is also spread on bread or used in shrimp scampi. It is composed of butter and garlic pounded into a paste. These ingredients are well blended and chilled before use.\n\nIn the United States, garlic butter in small cups is sometimes served with seafood (such as lobster), pizza, or breadsticks as a dip. To prolong shelf life, the dip may use clarified butter or flavored oils rather than real butter.\n\n"}
{"id": "18899715", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18899715", "title": "Famadihana", "text": "Famadihana\n\nFamadihana is a funerary tradition of the Malagasy people in Madagascar. During this ceremony, known as \"the turning of the bones\", people bring forth the bodies of their ancestors from the family crypts, rewrap the corpses in fresh cloth and rewrite their names on the cloth so they will always be remembered. Then they dance to live music while carrying the corpses over their heads and go around the tomb before returning the corpses to the family tomb.\n\nFamadihana appears to be a custom of somewhat recent origin, perhaps only since the 17th century in its present form, although it may be an adaptation of premodern double funeral customs from Southeast Asia. The custom is based upon a belief that the spirits of the dead finally join the world of the ancestors after the body's complete decomposition and appropriate ceremonies, which may take many years. In Madagascar this became a regular ritual usually once every seven years, and the custom brings together extended families in celebrations of kinship, sometimes even those with troubled relations. \n\nThe practice of Famadihana is on the decline due to the expense of silk shrouds and belief by some Malagasy that the practice is outdated. Early missionaries discouraged the practice and Evangelical Christian Malagasy have abandoned the practice in increasing numbers. The Catholic Church, however, no longer objects to the practice because it regards Famadihana as purely cultural rather than religious. As one Malagasy man explained to the BBC, \"It's important because it's our way of respecting the dead. It is also a chance for the whole family, from across the country, to come together.\"\n\n"}
{"id": "18906517", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18906517", "title": "Pneuma", "text": "Pneuma\n\nPneuma () is an ancient Greek word for \"breath\", and in a religious context for \"spirit\" or \"soul\". It has various technical meanings for medical writers and philosophers of classical antiquity, particularly in regard to physiology, and is also used in Greek translations of \"ruach\" רוח in the Hebrew Bible, and in the Greek New Testament. \nIn classical philosophy, it is distinguishable from \"psyche\" (), which originally meant \"breath of life\", but is regularly translated as \"spirit\" or most often \"soul\".\n\n\"Pneuma\", \"air in motion, breath, wind,\" is equivalent in the material monism of Anaximenes to \"aer\" (ἀήρ, \"air\") as the element from which all else originated. This usage is the earliest extant occurrence of the term in philosophy. A quotation from Anaximenes observes that \"just as our soul \"(psyche)\", being air \"(aer)\", holds us together, so do breath \"(pneuma)\" and air \"(aer)\" encompass the whole world.\" In this early usage, \"aer\" and \"pneuma\" are synonymous.\n\nIn ancient Greek medicine, \"pneuma\" is the form of circulating air necessary for the systemic functioning of vital organs. It is the material that sustains consciousness in a body. According to Diocles and Praxagoras, the psychic pneuma mediates between the heart, regarded as the seat of Mind in some physiological theories of ancient medicine, and the brain.\n\nThe disciples of Hippocrates explained the maintenance of vital heat to be the function of the breath within the organism. Around 300 BC, Praxagoras discovered the distinction between the arteries and the veins. In the corpse arteries are empty; hence, in the light of these preconceptions they were declared to be vessels for conveying \"pneuma\" to the different parts of the body. A generation afterwards, Erasistratus made this the basis of a new theory of diseases and their treatment. The \"pneuma\", inhaled from the outside air, rushes through the arteries till it reaches the various centres, especially the brain and the heart, and there causes thought and organic movement.\n\nThe \"connate pneuma\" of Aristotle is the warm mobile \"air\" that in the sperm transmits the capacity for locomotion and certain sensations to the offspring. These movements derive from the soul of the parent and are embodied by the \"pneuma\" as a material substance in semen. \"Pneuma\" is necessary for life, and as in medical theory is involved with the \"vital heat,\" but the Aristotelian \"pneuma\" is less precisely and thoroughly defined than that of the Stoics.\n\nIn Stoic philosophy, \"pneuma\" is the concept of the \"breath of life,\" a mixture of the elements air (in motion) and fire (as warmth). For the Stoics, \"pneuma\" is the active, generative principle that organizes both the individual and the cosmos. In its highest form, \"pneuma\" constitutes the human soul (\"psychê\"), which is a fragment of the \"pneuma\" that is the soul of God (Zeus). As a force that structures matter, it exists even in inanimate objects. In his Introduction to the 1964 book \"Meditations\", the Anglican priest Maxwell Staniforth wrote:\n\nCleanthes, wishing to give more explicit meaning to Zeno's 'creative fire', had been the first to hit upon the term \"pneuma\", or 'spirit', to describe it. Like fire, this intelligent 'spirit' was imagined as a tenuous substance akin to a current of air or breath, but essentially possessing the quality of warmth; it was immanent in the universe as God, and in man as the soul and life-giving principle.\n\nIn Judaic and Christian usage, \"pneuma\" is a common word for \"spirit\" in the Septuagint and the Greek New Testament. At John 3:5, for example, \"pneuma\" is the Greek word translated into English as \"spirit\": \"Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit (pneuma), he cannot enter into the kingdom of God.\" In some translations such as the King James version, however, \"pneuma\" is then translated as \"wind\" in verse eight, followed by the rendering \"Spirit\": \"The wind (pneuma) bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh, and whither it goeth: so is every one that is born of the Spirit (pneuma).\"\n\nPhilo, a 1st-century Hellenistic Jewish philosopher commented on the use of , rather than , in the Septuagint translation of . Philo explains that, in his view, \"pneuma\" is for the light breathing of human men while the stronger \"pnoē\" was used for the divine Spirit.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "18908577", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18908577", "title": "Francus", "text": "Francus\n\nFrancus is an invention of Merovingian scholars which referred to a legendary eponymous king of the Franks, a descendant of the Trojans, founder of the Merovingian dynasty and forefather of Charlemagne. In the Renaissance, Francus was generally considered to be another name for the Trojan Astyanax (son of Hector) saved from the destruction of Troy. He is not considered to be historical, but in fact an attempt by medieval and Renaissance chroniclers to model the founding of France upon the same illustrious tradition as that used by Virgil in his \"Aeneid\" (which had Rome founded by the Trojan Aeneas).\n\nThe 7th century \"Chronicle of Fredegar\" contains the oldest mention of a medieval legend thus linking the Franks to the Trojans. The Carolingian \"Liber historiae Francorum\" elaborates new details, and the tradition continued to be elaborated throughout the Middle Ages, when it was taken seriously as genealogy and became a \"veritable form of ethnic consciousness\".\n\nThe 8th century Nennius' \"Historia Brittonum\" makes mention of Francus as one of the four sons of Hisicion (Francus, Romanus, Alamanus, and Brutus), grandsons of Alanus, the first man to live in Europe.\n\nThe \"Grandes Chroniques de France\" (13th - 15th centuries), a vast compilation of historic material, make reference of the Trojan origins of the French dynasty.\n\nJohannes Trithemius' \"De origine gentis Francorum compendium\" (1514) describes the Franks as originally Trojans (called \"Sicambers\" or \"Sicambrians\") after the fall of Troy who came into Gaul after being forced out of the area around the mouth of the Danube by the Goths in 439 B.C. (section 1, p, 33). He also details the reigns of each of these kings—including Francus (section 43, p. 76) from whom the Franks are named—and their battles with the Gauls, Goths, Saxons, etc.\n\nAnnio da Viterbo also describes the arrival of Trojans into Gaul.\n\nBased on the medieval legend, Jean Lemaire de Belges's \"Illustrations de Gaule et Singularités de Troie\" (1510–12) has Astyanax survive the fall of Troy and arrive in Western Europe. He changes his name to Francus and becomes king of Celtic Gaul (while, at the same time, Bavo, cousin of Priam, comes to the city of Trier) and founds the dynasty leading to Pepin and Charlemagne. He is said to have founded and named the city of Paris in honor of his uncle Paris.\n\nGilles Corrozet's \"La Fleur des antiquitez... de Paris\" (1532) describes Francis I as the 64th descendant of Hector of Troy.\n\nLemaire de Belges' work inspired Pierre de Ronsard's epic poem \"La Franciade\" (1572). In this poem, Jupiter saves Astyanax (renamed Francus). The young hero arrives in Crete and falls in love with the princess Hyanthe with whom he is destined to found the royal dynasty of France.\n\nIn the tradition of \"translatio imperii\", many medieval authors established Greek or Roman genealogies for European dynasties:\n\n"}
{"id": "18915542", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18915542", "title": "Nomisma", "text": "Nomisma\n\nNomisma () was the ancient Greek word for \"money\" and is derived from nomos (νόμος) \"\"anything assigned, a usage, custom, law, ordinance\"\".\n\n\nIn modern Greek, the word \"nomisma\" means \"currency\". It is also a term used by numismatists when referring to the \"pieces of money or coin\" in the \"plural\" nomismata an example of which is the Aes rude of Numa Pompilius (the 2nd King of Rome). \n\nThe term \"nomos\" may also refer to an approximately 8 gram Achaean coin denomination. \n\n\n"}
{"id": "18937329", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18937329", "title": "Joffre cake", "text": "Joffre cake\n\nA Joffre cake is a chocolate buttermilk layer cake filled with chocolate ganache and frosted with chocolate buttercream originally created at Bucharest's Casa Capșa restaurant, in honor of a visit by French Marshal Joseph Joffre, shortly after World War I.\n\nSome commentators say the size of the Joffre cake probably had as a model the Adrian helmet worn by French and Romanian soldiers during World War I.\n"}
{"id": "18948035", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18948035", "title": "Awadhi cuisine", "text": "Awadhi cuisine\n\nAwadhi cuisine (, ) is a cuisine native to the city of Lucknow, which is the capital of the state of Uttar Pradesh in Northern India. It is very closely related to Bhojpuri cuisine of it neighboring region, Bhojpur. The cooking patterns of Lucknow are similar to those of Central Asia, the Middle East, and Northern India with the cuisine comprising both vegetarian and non-vegetarian dishes. The Awadh region has been greatly influenced by Mughal cooking techniques, and the cuisine of Lucknow bears similarities to those of Central Asia, Kashmir, Punjab and Hyderabad. The city is also known for its Nawabi foods.\n\nThe \"bawarchis\" (chefs) and \"rakabdars\" (gourmet cooks) of Awadh invented the dum style of cooking or the art of cooking over a slow fire, which has become synonymous with Lucknow today. Their spreads consisted of elaborate dishes such as kebabs, kormas, biryanis, kaliyas, nahari-kulchas, zarda, sheermal, rumali rotis, and warqi parathas. The richness of Awadh cuisine lies not only in the variety of cuisine but also in the ingredients used like mutton, paneer, and rich spices, which include cardamom and saffron.\n\nKebabs are the integral part of Awadhi. Lucknow is proud of its Kebabs. There are several varieties of popular kebabs in Awadhi cuisine viz. Kakori Kebabs, Galawat ke Kebabs, Shami Kebabs, Boti Kebabs, Patili-ke-Kebabs, Ghutwa Kebabs and Seekh Kebabs are among the known varieties.\n\nThe kebabs of Awadhi cuisine are distinct from the kebabs of Punjab insofar as Awadhi kebabs are grilled on a chula and sometimes in a skillet as opposed to grilled in a tandoor in Punjab. Awadhi kebabs are also called \"chula\" kebabs whereas the kebabs of Punjab are called \"tandoori\" kebabs.\nThe Seekh Kebab has long been considered a piece de resistance in the Awadhi dastarkhwan. Introduced by the Mughals it was originally prepared from beef mince on skewers and cooked on charcoal fire. Now lamb mince is preferred for its soft texture.\n\nThe 100-year-old Tunde ke Kabab in Chowk is the most famous outlet for Kababs even today. Tunde kabab is so named because it was the speciality of a one-armed chef. The tunde kabab claims to be unique because of the zealously guarded family secret recipe for the masala (homemade spices), prepared by women in the family. It is said to incorporate 160 spices.\n\nKakori kabab is considered blessed since it was originally made in the place by the same name in the dargah of Shah Abi Ahder Sahib with divine blessings. The meat used is from the tendon of the leg of mutton, combined with khoya and spices.\n\nShami Kebab is made from mincemeat, usually with chopped onion, coriander, and green chillies added. The kebabs are round patties filled with spicy mix and tangy raw green mango. The best time to have them is in May, when mangoes are young. When mangoes are not in season, kamrakh or karonda may be substituted for kairi, as both have a tart flavour reminiscent of raw mango.\n\nA variant made without any admixture or binding agents and comprising just the minced meat and the spices is the Galawat kabab.\n\nAn unusual offering is the Pasanda Kebab, piccata of lamb marinated and then sautéed on a griddle.\n\nBoti kebab is lamb marinated in yoghurt and cooked on skewers in a tandoor oven.\n\nVegetarian kebabs include Dalcha Kebab, Kathal ke Kebab, Arbi ke Kebab, Rajma Galoti Kebab (kidney bean kebab cooked with aromatic herbs), Zamikand ke Kebab (Lucknowi yam kebabs), etc.\n\nHere is the List of some popular Kebabs\n\n\nKorma is actually the Indian name for the technique of braising meat. It originated in the lavish Moghul cuisine wherein lamb or chicken was braised in velvety, spiced sauces, enriched with ground nuts, cream and butter. While kormas are rich, they are also mild, containing little or no cayenne or chillies. There are both vegetarian (navratan korma) and non-vegetarian (chicken, lamb, beef and fish korma) varieties of korma. Murgh Awadhi Korma is a classic from Lucknow.\n\nPullao is made by cooking meat in ghee with warm aromatic spices and then layered with meat curry or marinade (depending on the type of biryani), then sealed and cooked over low heat until done. The vegetarian version is called tehri.\n\nAs wheat is the staple food of the state, breads are very significant. Breads are generally flat breads baked in a pan; only a few varieties are raised breads. Improvisations of the roti (or bread) are of different types and made in various ways and include the rumaali roti, tandoori roti, naan (baked in a tandoor), kulcha, lachha paratha, sheermaal and baqarkhani.\n\nBreads made of other grains have descriptive names only, thus we have \"Makai ki roti\", \"Jowar ki roti\" (barley flour roti), \"Bajre ki roti\" (bajra is a grain only grown in India), \"chawal-ki-Roti\" (roti of rice flour).\n\n\nWinters are dedicated to halwas of all kinds that came to stay in India. There are several varieties of these, prepared from different cereals, such as gram flour, sooji, wheat, nuts and eggs. The special halwa or halwa sohan, has four varieties: Papadi, Jauzi, Habshi and Dudhiya.\n\nChaat and Samosa originated in Uttar Pradesh but now are popular nationwide and abroad. these are the integral part of street foods across India. The chaat variants are all based on fried dough, with various other ingredients. The original chaat is a mixture of potato pieces, gram or chickpeas and tangy-salty spices, with sour home-made Indian chilli and Saunth (dried ginger and tamarind sauce), fresh green coriander leaves and yogurt for garnish, but other popular variants included Aloo tikkis (garnished with onion, coriander, hot spices and a dash of curd), dahi puri, golgappa, dahi vada and papri chaat.\n\nThere are common elements among these variants including dahi, or yogurt; chopped onions and coriander; sev (small dried yellow salty noodles); and chaat masala, a spice mix typically consisting of amchoor (dried mango powder), cumin, Kala Namak (rock salt), coriander, dried ginger, salt, black pepper, and red pepper. The ingredients are combined and served on a small metal plate or a banana leaf, dried and formed into a bowl.\n\nFollowing is list of few Awadhi recipes:\n\n\n"}
{"id": "18951694", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18951694", "title": "Khuda", "text": "Khuda\n\nKhuda or Khoda () is the Persian word for \"Lord\" or \"God\". Originally, it was used in reference to Ahura Mazda (the name of God in Zoroastrianism). Other Iranian languages also use it.\n\nThe term derives from Middle Iranian terms \"xvatay, xwadag\" meaning \"lord\", \"ruler\", \"master\", appearing in written form in Parthian \"kwdy\", in Middle Persian \"kwdy\", and in Sogdian \"kwdy\". It is the Middle Persian reflex of older Iranian forms such as Avestan \"xa-dhata-\" \"self-defined; autocrat\", an epithet of Ahura Mazda. The Pashto term \"Xdāi\" (خدۍ) is either a Persian loanword or an Eastern Iranian cognate.\n\nProsaic usage is found for example in the Sassanid title \"katak-xvatay\" to denote the head of a clan or extended household or in the title of the 6th century \"Khwaday-Namag\" \"Book of Lords\", from which the tales of Kayanian dynasty as found in the \"Shahnameh\" derive.\n\nSemi-religious usage appears, for example, in the epithet \"zaman-i derang xvatay\" \"time of the long dominion\", as found in the \"Menog-i Khrad\". The fourth and eighty-sixth entry of the Pazend prayer titled \"101 Names of God\", \"Harvesp-Khoda\" \"Lord of All\" and \"Khudawand\" \"Lord of the Universe\", respectively, are compounds involving \"Khuda\".\nApplication of \"khuda\" as \"\"the\" Lord\" (Ahura Mazda) is represented in the first entry in the medieval \"Frahang-i Pahlavig\".\n\nIn Islamic times, the term came to be used for God in Islam, paralleling the Arabic name of God \"Al-Malik\" \"Owner, King, Lord, Master\".\n\nThe phrase Khuda Hafiz (meaning \"May God be your Guardian\") is a parting phrase commonly used in Persian, Kurdish, Bengali and Pashto, as well as in Hindustani and Punjabi among South Asian Muslims.\n\nIt also exists as a loanword, used for God in Turkish (\"Hüdâ\"), and by Muslims in Bengali, Punjabi and Urdu.\n\n"}
{"id": "18952265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18952265", "title": "Pulque", "text": "Pulque\n\nPulque (), or octli, is an alcoholic beverage made from the fermented sap of the maguey (agave) plant. It is traditional to central Mexico, where it has been produced for millennia. It has the color of milk, somewhat viscous consistency and a sour yeast-like taste. \n\nThe drink's history extends far back into the Mesoamerican period, when it was considered sacred, and its use was limited to certain classes of people. After the Spanish Conquest of Mexico, the drink became secular and its consumption rose. The consumption of pulque reached its peak in the late 19th century. In the 20th century, the drink fell into decline, mostly because of competition from beer, which became more prevalent with the arrival of European immigrants. There are some efforts to revive the drink's popularity through tourism.\n\nPulque is a milk-colored, somewhat viscous liquid that produces a light foam. It is made by fermenting the sap of certain types of maguey (agave) plants. In contrast, mezcal is made from the cooked heart of certain agave plants, and tequila, a variety of mezcal, is made all or mostly from the blue agave. About six varieties of maguey are best used for the production of pulque. The name \"pulque\" is derived from Nahuatl. The original name of the drink was \"iztāc octli\" (white pulque), the term pulque was probably mistakenly derived by the Spanish from the \"octli poliuhqui\" , which meant \"spoiled pulque\".\n\nThe maguey plant, also called a \"century plant\" in English, is native to Mexico. It grows best in the cold, dry climates of the rocky central highlands to the north and east of Mexico City, especially in the states of Hidalgo and Tlaxcala. Maguey has been cultivated at least since 200 CE in Tula, Tulancingo and Teotihuacan, and wild plants have been exploited for far longer. The plant historically has had a number of uses. Fibers can be extracted from the thick leaves to make rope or fabric, its thorns can be used as needles or punches and the membrane covering the leaves can be used as paper or for cooking. The name \"maguey\" was given by the Spanish, who picked it up from the Taíno. This is still its common name in Spanish, with \"Agave\" being its scientific generic or technical name. The Nahuatl name of the plant is \"metl\".\n\nThe manufacturing process of pulque is complex and required the death of the maguey plant. As the plant nears maturity, the center begins to swell and elongate as the plant gathers stored sugar to send up a single flower stalk, which may reach up to 20 feet in height. However, plants destined for pulque production have this flower stalk cut off, leaving a depressed surface 12-18 inches in diameter. In this center, the maguey sap, known as \"aguamiel\" (honeywater), collects. It takes a maguey plant 12 years to mature enough to produce the sap for pulque.\n\nPulque has been drunk for at least 1,000 years, and its origins are the subject of various stories and myths. Most involve Mayahuel, the goddess of the maguey. It was thought that the aguamiel collecting in the center of the plant was her blood. Other deities, such as the Centzon Totochtin (400 rabbits) are associated with it, by representing the drink's effects, and are the children of Mayahuel. Another version involving \"Mayahuel\" has her as a mortal woman who discovered how to collect aguamiel but someone named \"Pantecatl\" discovered how to make pulque.\n\nAccording to another story, pulque was discovered by the \"Tlacuache\" (opossum), who used his human-like hands to dig into the maguey and extract the naturally fermenting juice. He became the first drunk. \"Tlacuache\" was thought to set the course of rivers. The rivers he set were generally straight except when he was drunk. Then they follow \"Tlacuache's\" meandering path from cantina to cantina.\n\nAnother account traces the discovery of aguamiel to the Toltec Empire, when a noble named Papantzin was trying to get the emperor to marry his daughter Xochitl. He sent her to the capital with an offering of \"aguamiel\", honey of the agave plant. The emperor and princess wed, and their son was named \"Meconetzin\" (maguey son). In other versions of the story, Xochitl is credited with discovering pulque.\n\nThe maguey was one of the most sacred and important plants in ancient Mexico. It had a privileged place in mythology, religious rituals and the Mesoamerican economy. Pulque appears in a number of graphic representations from pre-colonial times, beginning with stone carvings from about 200 CE. The first major work involving pulque is a large mural called the \"Pulque Drinkers\", unearthed in 1968 at the pyramid of Cholula, Puebla. The most likely means of the discovery of aguamiel and fermented pulque was from the observation of rodents who gnaw and scratch at the plant to drink the seeping sap. Fermentation of the aguamiel can take place within the plant itself.\n\nFor the indigenous peoples of the central highlands of Mexico, the imbibing of pulque was done only by certain people, under certain conditions. It was a ritual drink, consumed during certain festivals, such as that of the goddess Mayahuel, and the god Mixcoatl. It was drunk by priests and sacrificial victims, to increase the priests' enthusiasm and to ease the suffering of the victim. There are many references in Aztec codices, such as the Borbonicus Codex, of pulque's use by nobility and priesthood to celebrate victories. Among commoners, it was permitted only to the elderly and pregnant women. Production of pulque was ritualized and the brewers were superstitious. They would abstain from sex during the fermentation period because they believed that sexual intercourse would sour the process.\n\nAfter the Conquest, pulque lost its sacred character, and both indigenous and Spanish people began to drink it. The Spanish initially made no laws regarding its use. It became a lucrative source of tax revenue, but by 1672, public drunkenness had become enough of a problem that the viceregal government created regulations to curtail its consumption. A maximum of 36 \"pulquerias\" were permitted for Mexico City, which had to be located in open areas, be without doors and close at sundown. Food, music, dancing and the co-mingling of the sexes was prohibited. However, pulque continued to play a major role in the socioeconomic history of Mexico during colonial times and in the early years of Independence. Through this period, it was the fourth largest source of tax revenue. At the end of the 17th century, the Jesuits began large-scale production of the drink to finance its educational institutions. In this way, the making of pulque passed from being a home-made brew to one commercially produced.\n\nThe casta system of racial hierarchy was created in Spanish America for elites to classify individuals into groups based on phenotype and perceived social class, and give them characteristics that were supposedly inherent to their group. Often artists portrayed mixed-race castas. This form of Mexican art portrayed castas in settings that were typical of their social group. The portrayal of pulque was used to show polarization between different castas. Before the Spanish colonization of the Americas, pulque was used for religious ceremonies in Mesoamerica. After the arrival of the Spanish, consumption was widespread among Indigenous Americans and mixed-race castas. This led to many social problems including sexual crimes and violence within the population.\n\nIn casta painting, pulque depicted situations the Europeans saw as characteristic of the castas they portrayed. Some of these paintings incorporated images of indigenous Americans and Africans as drunk with bottles appearing in the scenes. This is a reason that \"shortly after the conquests, colonial officials declared pulque abuse and Indian drunkenness a major concern and committed themselves to addressing its impacts on society\". As a result, some casta painters depicted different castas safely consuming and selling pulque. Other casta painters depicted Indigenous Americans intoxicated in the streets, and incapacitated which as a result required their families to escort them home. Casta painting was used as a method of social commentary on the destructive use of pulque in everyday society. As the Spanish attempted to crack down on pulque, some casta painters depicted indigenous Americans in safe environments where even children were able to consume pulque. The paintings were meant to show that Spanish regulation was effective in controlling the consumption and distribution of pulque in the colonial period.\n\nProduction of pulque exploded after Independence, when the regulation of pulque producers ended, and Mexican nationalism increased. From then until the 1860s, pulque haciendas multiplied, especially in Hidalgo and Tlaxcala states. In 1866, the first railway between Veracruz and Mexico City began operations, crossing through Hidalgo. This line was soon known as the \"Pulque Train\" because it brought supplies of the drink daily to the capital. This production and easy shipment of the drink made Hidalgo rich, and gave rise to a \"pulque aristocracy\" made up of some of the most powerful families of this time: Torres Adalid, Pimenta y Fagoaga, Macedo and others. At its peak, there were about 300 pulque haciendas. Some still remain in the plains of Apan and Zempoala, in Hidalgo. Pulque hit its peak of popularity during the late 19th century, when it was enjoyed by rich and poor alike. As late as 1953, Hidalgo and Tlaxcala still obtained 30 and 50% respectively of their total revenues from pulque. This has diminished since then since irrigation, roads and other infrastructure has made possible other, more lucrative enterprises.\n\nIn spite of its former popularity, pulque represents only 10% of the alcoholic beverages consumed in Mexico today. Pulque is still consumed in Mexico, mostly in the central highlands and predominantly in rural and poor areas. It has acquired a general connotation of being something for the lower class, while consumption of European-style beer flourished throughout the 20th century.\n\nThe complex and delicate fermentation process of pulque had always limited the product's distribution, as it does not keep long and agitation during transport speeds degradation. Since pre-Hispanic times, its consumption has mostly been limited to the central highlands of Mexico.\n\nThe decline of pulque began in the first decade of the 20th century, when the Mexican Revolution caused a decline in its production. In the 1930s, the government of Lázaro Cárdenas campaigned against pulque, as part of an effort to reduce alcoholic consumption in general. But the most decisive factor to the decline of pulque has been the introduction of beer.\n\nEuropean immigrant beer brewers in the early 20th century had their own campaign against the native pulque, claiming that pulque producers used a \"muñeca\" (doll), a textile bag containing human or animal feces which was placed in the \"aguamiel\" to hasten the fermentation process. Some pulque producers have insisted that the \"muñeca\" is completely a myth, but modern historians suggest that it did happen, although only rarely. Beer producers promoted the idea that pulque was generally made this way, generally by word of mouth and insinuation. This was done to inhibit pulque sales and to promote the consumption of beer, which they claimed was \"rigorously hygienic and modern\".\n\nThe strategy proved successful, with pulque now generally looked-down-upon and imbibed by relatively few people, with Mexican-brewed beer ubiquitous and extremely popular. Pulque's popularity is low and continues to fall. Twenty years ago, about 20 trucks would come every three days to Xochimilco (in southern Mexico City) to deliver pulque, but now the number is down to one or two. Only five pulquerias remain in this district, where there used to be 18. The situation is similar in most other parts of Mexico, as well. The remaining pulquerias are very small establishments, selling a product made by small producers.\n\nIn the state of Hidalgo, in which most maguey is grown, fields of this plant are disappearing, with barley taking its place. Most maguey plants here serve as boundary markers between properties. Many of these plants do not survive long, as they are often vandalized. An estimated 10,000 plants are mutilated each week by cutting off the lower leaves for barbacoa or destroying them completely to look for the edible white grubs or ant eggs that can inhabit them.\n\n\"UPDATE: A recent series of PBS travel shows feature pulque and say that it is once again a VERY popular drink and that there is a retro movement leading younger people seeking to establish their Mexican heritage to drink this beverage in large quantities. It has become a trendy drink among youth and back-to-your-roots types. The prohibition on female drinkers has also been lifted and co-ed pulquerias are now the norm.\n\nAlso flavored syrups, seasonings and so on are now common with one pulqueria featured in the special offering 48 separate flavors.\" \n\nThe production process is long and delicate. The maguey plant needs 12 years of maturation before the sap, or \"aguamiel\", can be extracted, but a good plant can produce for up to one year. This aguamiel can be drunk straight, but it is alcoholic only after a fermentation process that can start in the plant itself. This liquid is collected twice a day from the plant, yielding about five or six liters per day. Today, this liquid is collected with a steel scoop, but in the past, an elongated gourd was used as a tube to suck the juice out. Between gatherings, the plant's leaves are bent over the center where the juice collects to keep out bugs and dirt. This center is regularly scraped out to keep the plant's production of sap active. Most maguey plants produce this \"aguamiel\" for about four to six months before they finally die. Some plants can yield up to 600 L of pulque. \n\nThe collected juice is placed into 50-liter barrels and carried from the field to the fermentation vats. These vats, called \"tinas\", are located in a special building called a \"tinacal\". This word derives from Spanish \"tina\" and Nahuatl \"calli\" that means house of vats. When pulque haciendas reached their peak in the late 19th century, hacienda life revolved around these \"tinacals\". It typically was a rectangular shed of stone with a wooden roof. The upper parts of the walls opened for air circulation and the façades were sometimes decorated with indigenous designs or other images associated with the making of pulque. One popular motif was the discovery of pulque by Xochitl. Other popular elements were the images of the hacienda's patron saint and the Virgin of Guadalupe. Inside were the vats, which were cowhide stretched over wooden frames lined up against the walls. In larger \"tinacals\", there were three or four rows of vats. Today, the \"tinas\" are made of oak, plastic or fiberglass and hold about 1,000 liters each.\nAfter placing the juice in the fermentation vats, mature seed pulque (\"semilla\" or \"xanaxtli\") is added to \"jump start\" the process. Unlike beer, the fermenting agent present in pulque is a bacterium of the species \"Zymomonas mobilis\" (syn. \"Thermobacterium mobile\" ) rather than yeast. Those in charge of the fermentation process guard their trade secrets, passing them on from father to son. Fermentation takes from seven to 14 days, and the process seems to be more art than science. A number of factors can affect fermenting pulque, such as temperature, humidity and the quality of the \"aguamiel\".\n\nThe process is complex and delicate, and can go sour at any point. For this reason, and perhaps due to its ancient \"sacred\" character, there are rituals and prohibitions. Religious songs and prayers may be offered, and women, children and strangers are not allowed inside the \"tinacal\". Other superstitions include those against eating canned fish and wearing a hat inside the tinacal. The first is claimed to cause a bad taste in the pulque and the second is considered bad luck. To cleanse the bad luck, the offender must fill the hat with pulque and drink it down.\n\nJust before the peak of fermentation, the pulque is quickly shipped to market in barrels. The fermentation process is continuous, so the pulque must be consumed within a certain time before it spoils.\n\nMost pulque is consumed in bars called \"pulquerías\". At the beginning of the 20th century, more than 1,000 were located in Mexico City alone. By the early 20th century, \"pulquerías\" became socially accepted, and some were places of great elegance. But whether for rich or poor, two features stood out among these establishments: odd or catchy names, and murals decorating the walls. Names included (translated) \"My Office\", \"Memories of the Future\", \"Drink and Go\", \"I'm Waiting for You Here at the Corner\", and, across the street from the National Chamber of Deputies, \"The Recreation Center of Those Across the Street\". Diego Rivera once said one of the most important manifestations of Mexican painting was the murals that decorated the facades and interiors of \"pulquerías\". One tradition maintained at all\" pulquerias \"at the beginning of the 20th century was to put sawdust on the floor. The tradition at that time was to begin a pulque-drinking session by spilling a little on the floor or ground as an offering to Mother Earth. Traditional \"pulquerías\" tend to be like clubs with closed membership, with casual visitors ignored or sometimes stared at. Frequent visits and large consumption of the drink tends to win acceptance. While some establishments may forbid women, it is much more common for the establishment to provide a separate seating area for them. Intermingling of the sexes is not permitted. In the more rural areas of Hidalgo and Tlaxcala, where most pulque is made, the pulque is fresher and better. A vendor usually displays a white flag over the door when a fresh shipment has arrived.\n\nTraditionally, pulque is served from large barrels on ice. and served into glasses, using a \"jicara\", which is a half of a calabash tree gourd. The bartender is called a \"jicarero\". In a \"pulquería\", \"cruzado\", meaning something like \"bottoms up\", is a frequent salute.\n\nDrinking glasses have colorful names and can reflect a customer's ability to drink pulque. Large two-liter glasses are called \"macetas\" (flower pots), one-liter glasses are called \"cañones\" (cannons), half–liters are called \"chivitos\" (little goats), quarter-liter glasses are \"catrinas\" (dandies), and eighth-liter glasses are \"tornillos\" (screws). Traditionally, these glasses are made from a greenish, hand blown glass. Pulque can be drunk straight from the barrel or can have a number of additives, such as fruit or nuts, added. Pulque prepared this way is called \"curado\" or cured.\n\nOne of the limitations to pulque's popularity has been the inability to store it for long periods or ship it far. Recently, pulque makers have found a way to preserve the beverage in cans. However, they admit this does change the flavor. The hope is that with this innovation, pulque can regain its lost market in Mexico and even achieve success as an export item, like tequila. It is already being offered in the United States by Boulder Imports, selling the brand \"Nectar del Razo\". The original market was Mexican-American men, but the company reports the product is having success as a health food, sought out by athletes and body builders.\n\nThere is a saying that pulque \"sólo le falta un grado para ser carne\" – \"it is only a bit shy of being meat\", referring to the nutritional value of the drink. This was recognized by the Mesoamericans, who allowed pregnant women and the elderly to imbibe what was normally reserved only for priests and nobility. Modern analysis of the liquid has found that it contains carbohydrates, vitamin C, B-complex, D, E, amino acids and minerals such as iron and phosphorus.\n\nFrom the glory days of pulque, the state of Hidalgo has about 250 pulque haciendas, many of which have been abandoned or converted to other uses, such as ranching. Their \"tinacals\" have either disappeared or been converted into storage or party rooms. A few remaining ones continue to make pulque, but use more modern and sanitary facilities. In Tlaxcala, the federal Secretariat of Tourism and the state government have organized a tour called the \"Pulque Route\", which includes the main haciendas that still make the beverage in this state. It is a two-day route which begins at the Church of La Barca de la Fe in Calpulalpan to the San Bartolo Hacienda, which is the principal exporter of canned pulque. This hacienda was the property of Ignacio Torres Adalid, who was called the \"king of pulque\". Today, it belongs to Ricardo del Razo. The tour also covers maguey fields like those around a town called Guillermo Ramirez.\nThese old haciendas varied widely. Some were ostentatious with great architectural harmony such as the Montecillos Hacienda, of Spanish colonial style and originally built in the 17th century by the Jesuits or San Antonio Ometusco Hacienda built by architect Antonio Rivas Mercado. However, most haciendas were the result of a constructive process that started in the 16th century, with mixed architectural styles and methods of both Mexico and Europe. One characteristic feature is Neo-Gothic towers. The Santiago Tetlapayac Hacienda has murals related to charreada and attributed to the painter Icaza. The Zotoluca Hacienda has an octangonal floorplan in Neo-Moorish style and was restored in the 1950s. But the center of each of these pulque haciendas is the tinacal. They were planned and decorated befitting their importance. Almost all have interesting architectural details, such as a specially decorated main doorway, murals or sculpted windows. Some are considered works of art, such as the tinacal at the Montecillos Hacienda or the one at the San Antonio Ometusco Hacienda, which also has an elegant canopy covering the shipping dock with moulded iron columns and walls decorated with murals relating to the history of pulque.\n\n"}
{"id": "18978668", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18978668", "title": "Pickled cucumber", "text": "Pickled cucumber\n\nA pickled cucumber (commonly known as a pickle in the United States and Canada and a gherkin in Britain, Ireland, Australia, South Africa and New Zealand) is a cucumber that has been pickled in a brine, vinegar, or other solution and left to ferment for a period of time, by either immersing the cucumbers in an acidic solution or through souring by lacto-fermentation. Pickled cucumbers are often part of mixed pickles.\n\nIt is often claimed that pickled cucumbers were first developed for workers building the Great Wall of China, though another hypothesis is that they were first made in the Tigris Valley of Mesopotamia, using cucumbers brought originally from India.\n\nA gherkin is a variety of cucumber: the West Indian or burr gherkin (\"Cucumis anguria\"), which produces a somewhat smaller fruit than the garden cucumber (\"Cucumis sativus\"). Gherkins are cooked, eaten raw, or used as pickles. Gherkins are usually picked when 4 to 8 cm (1 to 3 in) in length and pickled in jars or cans with vinegar (often flavoured with herbs, particularly dill; hence, \"dill pickle\") or brine. Sugar is also a popular addition, in which case the label typically shows \"Sweet Gherkins\".\n\nCornichons are tart French pickles made from small gherkins pickled in vinegar and tarragon. They traditionally accompany pâtés and cold cuts.\n\nBrined pickles are prepared using the traditional process of natural fermentation in a brine which makes them grow sour. The brine concentration can vary between 20 to more than 40 grams of salt per litre of water ( or ). There is no vinegar used in the brine of naturally fermented pickled cucumbers.\n\nThe fermentation process is dependent on the Lactobacillus bacteria that naturally occur on the skin of a growing cucumber. These may be removed during commercial harvesting and packing processes. Bacteria cultures can be reintroduced to the vegetables by adding already fermented foods such as yogurt or other fermented milk products, pieces of sourdough bread and of course pickled vegetables such as sauerkraut.\n\nTypically, small cucumbers are placed in a glass or ceramic vessel or a wooden barrel, together with a variety of spices. Among those traditionally used in many recipes are garlic, horseradish, whole dill stems with umbels and green seeds, white mustard seeds, grape, oak, cherry, blackcurrant and bay laurel leaves, dried allspice fruits, and—most importantly—salt. The container is then filled with cooled, boiled water and kept under a non-airtight cover (often cloth tied on with string or a rubber band) for several weeks, depending on taste and external temperature. Traditionally stones, also sterilized by boiling, are placed on top of the cucumbers to keep them under the water. The more salt is added the more sour the cucumbers become.\n\nSince they are produced without vinegar, a film of bacteria forms on the top, but this does not indicate they have spoiled, and the film is simply removed. They do not, however, keep as long as cucumbers pickled with vinegar, and usually must be refrigerated. Some commercial manufacturers add vinegar as a preservative.\n\nA \"kosher\" dill pickle is not necessarily kosher in the sense that it has been prepared in accordance with Jewish dietary law. Rather, it is a pickle made in the traditional manner of Jewish New York City pickle makers, with generous addition of garlic and dill to a natural salt brine.\n\nIn New York terminology, a \"full-sour\" kosher dill is one that has fully fermented, while a \"half-sour\", given a shorter stay in the brine, is still crisp and bright green. Elsewhere, these pickles may sometimes be termed \"old\" and \"new\" dills.\n\nDill pickles (not necessarily described as \"kosher\") have been served in New York City since at least 1899.\n\nThe Polish- or German-style pickled cucumber (; ), was developed in the northern parts of central and eastern Europe. It has been exported worldwide and is found in the cuisines of many countries, including the United States, where it was introduced by immigrants. It is sour, similar to the kosher dill, but tends to be seasoned differently. \n\nTraditionally it was preserved in wooden barrels, but now is sold in glass jars. A cucumber only pickled for a few days is different in taste (less sour) than one pickled for a longer time and is called \"ogórek małosolny\", which literally means \"low-salt cucumber.\" This distinction is similar to the one between half- and full-sour types of kosher dills (see above).\n\nAnother kind of pickled cucumber popular in Poland is \"ogórek konserwowy\" (\"preserved cucumber\") which is rather sweet and vinegary in taste, due to different composition of the preserving solution.\n\nIn Hungary, while regular vinegar-pickled cucumbers () are made during most of the year, during the summer \"kovászos uborka\" (\"leavened pickles\") are made without the use of vinegar. Cucumbers are placed in a glass vessel along with spices (usually dill and garlic), water and salt. Additionally, a slice or two of bread are placed at the top and bottom of the solution, and the container is left to sit in the sun for a few days so the yeast in the bread can help cause a fermentation process.\n\nIn Romania, cucumbers are one of the vegetables used for Murături.\n\nIn Korea, \"oi-ji\" () is a type of \"jjanji\" (salted vegetables).\n\nLime pickles are soaked in pickling lime (not to be confused with the citrus fruit) rather than in a salt brine. This is done more to enhance texture (by making them crisper) rather than as a preservative. The lime is then rinsed off the pickles. Vinegar and sugar are often added after the 24-hour soak in lime, along with pickling spices.\n\nBread-and-butter pickles are a marinated pickle produced with sliced cucumbers in a solution of vinegar, sugar and spices which may be processed either by canning or simply chilled as refrigerator pickles. The origin of the name and the spread of their popularity in the United States is attributed to Omar and Cora Fanning, a pair of Illinois cucumber farmers who started selling sweet and sour pickles in the 1920s and filed for the trademark \"Fanning's Bread and Butter Pickles\" in 1923 (though the recipe and similar ones are probably much older). The story attached to the name is that the Fannings survived rough years by making the pickles with their surplus of undersized cucumbers and bartering them with their grocer for staples such as bread and butter.\n\nBright red, cinnamon-flavored pickles produced by a multiday process are sometimes seen as a Christmas treat. They are somewhat similar to canned red cinnamon apple rings in color and texture.\n\nSwedish pickled cucumbers (\"pressgurka\") are thinly sliced, mixed with salt and pressed to drain some water from the cucumber slices. Afterwards placed in a jar with a sour-sweet brine of vinegar, sugar, dill and mustard seeds.\nDanish cucumber salad (\"agurkesalat\") is similar, but the cucumbers are not pressed and the brine doesn't have parsley. The cucumber salad accompanies meat dishes, especially a roasted chicken dish (\"gammeldags kylling med agurkesalat\"), and is used on Danish hot dogs.\nThere are also \"long time pickles\", which call for some months of cool storing in order to be edible. In southern Sweden and Denmark a solution of water, \"mild\" acidic vinegar (not made of wine and as clear as water), sugar and the top of dill plants, known as \"krondill\" (English: crown dill) and \"a little\" salt. In Sweden this is known as \"Ättiksgurka\" (English: vinegar cucumber) and has a crispy sweet and sour taste. Further north in Sweden some of the acidic vinegar and all the sugar are replaced with more salt. This is known as \"saltgurka\". Both \"ättiksgurka\" and \"saltgurka\" are used as a minor part of certain dishes.\n\nKool-Aid pickles or \"koolickles\", enjoyed by children in parts of the Southern United States, are created by soaking dill pickles in a mixture of Kool-Aid and pickle brine.\n\nLike pickled vegetables such as sauerkraut, sour pickled cucumbers (technically a fruit) are low in calories. They also contain a moderate amount of vitamin K, specifically in the form of K. 30-gram sour pickled cucumber offers 12–16 µg, or approximately 15–20%, of the Recommended Daily Allowance of vitamin K. It also offers , most of which come from carbohydrate. However, most sour pickled cucumbers are also high in sodium; one pickled cucumber can contain 350–500 mg, or 15–20% of the American recommended daily limit of 2400 mg.\n\nSweet pickled cucumbers, including bread-and-butter pickles, are higher in calories due to their sugar content; a similar 30-gram portion may contain . Sweet pickled cucumbers also tend to contain significantly less sodium than sour pickles.\n\nPickles are being researched for their ability to act as vegetables with a high probiotic content. Probiotics are typically associated with dairy products, but lactobacilli species such as \"L. plantarum\" and \"L. brevis\" have been shown to add to the nutritional value of pickles.\n\nIn the United States, pickles are often served as a side dish accompanying meals. This often takes the form of a \"pickle spear\", which is a pickled cucumber cut length-wise into quarters or sixths. Pickles may be used as a condiment on a hamburger or other sandwich (usually in slice form), or on a sausage or hot dog in chopped form as pickle relish.\n\nSoured cucumbers are commonly used in a variety of dishes—for example, pickle-stuffed meatloaf, potato salad or chicken salad—or consumed alone as an appetizer.\n\nPickles are sometimes served alone as festival foods, often on a stick. This is also done in Japan, where it is referred to as .\n\nDill pickles can be fried, typically deep-fried with a breading or batter surrounding the spear or slice. This is a popular dish in the southern US, and a rising trend elsewhere in the US.\n\nIn Russia and Ukraine, pickles are used in rassolnik: a traditional soup made from pickled cucumbers, pearl barley, pork or beef kidneys, and various herbs. The dish is known to have existed as far back as the 15th century, when it was called kalya.\n\nIn southern England, large gherkins pickled in vinegar are served as an accompaniment to fish and chips, and are sold from big jars on the counter at a fish and chip shop, along with pickled onions. In the Cockney dialect of London, this type of gherkin is called a \"wally\".\n\nThe term \"pickle\" is derived from the Dutch word \"pekel\", meaning \"brine\". In the United States and Canada, the word \"pickle\" alone almost always refers to a pickled cucumber (other types of pickles will be described as \"pickled onion\", \"pickled beets\", etc.). In the UK \"pickle\" generally refers to ploughman's pickle made from various vegetables, such as Branston pickle, traditionally served with a ploughman's lunch.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "18985156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18985156", "title": "Sock", "text": "Sock\n\nA sock is an item of clothing worn on the feet and often covering the ankle or some part of the calf. Some type of shoe or boot is typically worn over socks. In ancient times, socks were made from leather or matted animal hair. In the late 16th century, machine-knit socks were first produced. Until 1800 both hand knitting and machine knitting were used to produce socks, but after 1800, machine knitting became the predominant method.\n\nOne of the roles of socks is absorbing perspiration. The foot is among the heaviest producers of sweat in the body, as it can produce over of perspiration per day; socks help to absorb this sweat and draw it to areas where air can evaporate the perspiration. In cold environments, socks made from wool insulate the foot and decrease the risk of frostbite. Socks are worn with sport shoes (typically white-coloured socks) and dress shoes (typically dark-coloured socks). In addition to the numerous practical roles played by socks, they are also a fashion item, and they are available in myriad colours and patterns.\nThe modern English word \"sock\" is derived from the Old English word \"socc\", meaning \"light slipper\". This comes from the Latin \"soccus\", a term to describe a \"light, low-heeled shoe\" worn by Roman comic actors, and deriving from the Ancient Greek word \"sykchos\".\n\nSocks have evolved over the centuries from the earliest models, which were made from animal skins gathered up and tied around the ankles. According to the Greek poet Hesiod, in the 8th century BC, the Ancient Greeks wore socks called \"piloi\", which were made from matted animal hair. The Romans also wrapped their feet with leather or woven fabrics. Around the 2nd century AD, the Romans started sewing the fabrics together making fitted socks called \"udones\". By the 5th century AD, socks called \"puttees\" were worn by holy people in Europe to symbolize purity. \n\nDuring the Middle Ages, the length of trousers was extended and the sock became a tight, brightly colored cloth covering the lower part of the leg. Since socks didn’t have an elastic band, garters were placed over the top of the stockings to prevent them from falling down. When breeches became shorter, socks began to get longer (and more expensive). By 1000 AD, socks became a symbol of wealth among the nobility. From the 16th century onwards, an ornamental design on the ankle or side of a sock has been called a clock.\n\nThe invention of a knitting machine in 1589 meant that socks could be knitted six times faster than by hand. Nonetheless, knitting machines and hand knitters worked side by side until 1800.\n\nThe next revolution in sock production was the introduction of nylon in 1938. Until then socks were commonly made from silk, cotton and wool. Nylon was the start of blending two or more yarns in the production of socks, a process that still continues today.\n\nSocks can be created from a wide variety of materials, such as cotton, wool, nylon, acrylic, polyester, olefins, (such as polypropylene), or spandex. To get an increased level of softness other materials that might be used during the process can be silk, bamboo, linen, cashmere, or mohair. The color variety of sock choices can be any color that the designers intend to make the sock upon its creation. Sock 'coloring' can come in a wide range of colors. Sometimes art is also put onto socks to increase their appearance. Colored socks may be a key part of the uniforms for sports, allowing players teams to be distinguished when only their legs are clearly visible.\n\nThe township-level district of Datang in the city of Zhuji in Zhejiang Province, People's Republic of China, has become known as Sock City. The town currently produce 8 billion pairs of socks each year, a third of the world's sock production, effectively creating two pairs of socks for every person on the planet in 2011.\n\nSocks are manufactured in a variety of lengths. Bare or ankle socks extend to the ankle or lower and are often worn casually or for athletic use. Bare socks are designed to create the look of \"bare feet\" when worn with shoes. Knee-high socks are sometimes associated with formal dress or as being part of a uniform, such as in sports (like football and baseball) or as part of a school's dress code or youth group's uniform. Over-the-knee socks or socks that extend higher (thigh-high socks) are today considered female garments. They were widely worn by children, both boys and girls, during the late 19th and early 20th centuries., although the popularity varied widely from country to country. When worn by adult females, knee-high or thigh-high socks can become the object of sexual attraction and fetishism by some men.\nA toe sock encases each toe individually the same way a finger is encased in a glove, while other socks have one compartment for the big toe and one for the rest, like a mitten; most notably Japanese tabi. Both of these allow one to wear flip-flops with the socks.\nLeg warmers, which are not typically socks, may be replaced with socks in cold climates.\n\nA business sock is a term for a colored sock for conservative appearance and casual footwear. The term is often used loosely to indicate a term for a conservative office setting. For instance, business socks, business shirts and business shoes are used for office and job. These socks usually have patterns and are known to be a cause for bleach stains in laundry machines due to their colored manufacturing process and dyed attributes.\n\nCrew socks are short, thick everyday socks usually ribbed at the top of the ankles. They can be used in a way to warm legs. The first familiar practice of crew sock was in 1948. Crew socks are usually unisex.\n\nLow cut sock is a kind of sock that describe in a way to be cut below ankle. Low cut socks are formed to cover the contours of feet. Low cut socks are unisex wearing but women and girls commonly use them. Low cut socks are normally worn with shoes such as boat shoes, Oxfords, moccasins and loafers.\n\nThe Ancient Egyptian style of sock is a blend between modern Western socks and Japanese tabi, both of which it predates. Like tabi, Egyptian socks have one compartment for the big toe and another for the rest, permitting their use with sandals; like Western socks, they fit snugly to the foot and do not use fasteners like tabi.\n\nAlthough generally holding to a pattern of being divided into sizes of small-medium-large, etc., what range of shoe sizes those sock sizes correspond to carries in different markets. Some size standards are coordinated by standard-setting bodies but others have arisen from custom. Sock lengths vary, from ankle-high to thigh level.\n\nMost sports will require some sort of sock, usually a tube sock to protect one's legs from being scraped while participating in sport activities. In basketball, tube socks are worn, and in lacrosse, mid-calf socks are required. In football, knee socks are used. They are mostly to stop grass burns.\n\nThe layer of leather or other material covering the insole of a shoe is also referred to as a sock. When only part of the insole is covered, leaving the forepart visible, this is known as a half-sock.\n\nFootwraps, pieces of cloth that are worn wrapped around the feet, were worn with boots before socks became widely available. They remained in use by armies in Eastern Europe up until the beginning of the 21st century.\n\nFor use in cold environments, thermal socks are thicker. They are commonly worn for skiing, skating, and other winter sports. They not only provide insulation, but greater padding due to their thickness.\n\nDiabetic socks are kind of thermal sock made from a acrylic, cotton, nylon, and elastic. These are made to improve comfort while at the same time keeping feet cool and dry. There is no solid evidence that they are helpful.\n\nA sock is also used as a holiday item during Christmas. Children hang a large ceremonial sock called a Christmas stocking by a nail or hook on Christmas Eve, and then their parents fill it with small presents while the recipients are asleep. According to tradition, Santa Claus brings these presents.\n\nAmong Muslims, socks have initiated a discussion about the intricacies of wudhu, the formal washing carried out before prayer. Some Muslim clerics, mindful of possible hardship among Muslims in inhospitable circumstances, have issued Muslim edicts permitting practicing Muslims to wipe water over their sock or sprinkle their sock. This would allow prayer where there are no seating facilities, or if there is a queue. This is the stated opinion especially of Maliki Sunnis.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "18988261", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18988261", "title": "Southern Illinois chowder", "text": "Southern Illinois chowder\n\nSouthern Illinois Chowder is a thick stew or soup, very different from the New England and Manhattan chowders. The term \"chowder\" is of French-Indian origin. In Edwards County, Illinois, it refers to both the food and to the social gathering at which it is prepared and served. It is believed to have been brought to the area by the earliest settlers, or \"backwoodsmen\". Traditionally, the \"chowder time\" season commences when the first tomatoes ripen and closes with the first heavy frost.\n\nChowder is usually cooked outside in large black kettles or cauldrons, ranging in size from 20 to 70 gallons. The ingredients are added to boiling water according to their cooking time, so that all are cooked and ready at the same time. The main ingredients are beef, chicken, tomatoes, cabbage, lima beans, and green beans. Traditionally, squirrel meat was a common addition. Chowder is usually considered ready when the ingredients have amalgamated into a fairly thick soup, usually taking four or more hours. The kettles must be stirred almost continuously so that the chowder does not \"catch\" on the base and scorch. This is accomplished using a wooden blade known as a \"paddle\". Measuring between eighteen to twenty-four inches long and six to eight inches wide, a paddle has had several bored holes through the blade and a handle attached at right angles. One cook will paddle the chowder - causing the bones to rise - and another cook, called \"the bone picker,\" will use tongs to pick out bones as they separate from the meat.\n\nIn 1958, the County Commissioners of Edwards County, Illinois, proclaimed their county the \"Chowder Capital of the World.\"\n\n\n"}
{"id": "19003136", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19003136", "title": "Kuai (dish)", "text": "Kuai (dish)\n\nKuai was a Chinese dish consisting of finely cut strips of raw fish or meat, which was popular and commonly eaten in the early Chinese dynasties. According to the \"Book of Rites\" compiled between 202 BC and 220 AD, \"kuai\" consists of small thin slices or strips of raw meat, which are prepared by first thinly slicing the meat and then cutting the thin slices into strips. In modern times, the dishes are more often referred to as \"raw fish slices\" () or as \"yusheng\" (). The type of fish commonly used in ancient times included carp (鯉) and mandarin fish (鳜), while in modern times salmon (鮭) is commonly used.\n\nSauces were an essential part of \"kuai\" dishes, with scallions used for preparation of sauces in spring and mustard seed used for sauces in autumn. According to many classical texts, \"kuai\" served without sauces was deemed inedible and should be avoided.\n\nRaw fish and meat dishes, known collectively as \"kuai\", were first documented in China in the Zhou dynasty (1045–256 BC), and are mentioned in the \"Classic of Poetry\", \"Classic of Rites\", \"Analects\" and \"Mencius\". A related preparation method is \"xuan\" (), which involve slicing the raw meat in large thin pieces in the manner of carpaccio, however the term \"kuai\" was used to refer to this method. \"Kuai\" is the preferred preparation of raw beef and lamb, or fish such as the carp, while meat from wild deer and boar were prepared as \"xuan\". Thinness in the slices or strips was an important factor for judging the quality of the dish. During the Zhou dynasty and the Warring States period, \"kuai\" made from all fauna were widely consumed.\n\nDuring the time of the Qin (221–206 BC) and Han (206 BC–220 AD) dynasties, \"kuai\" made from the meat of land fauna became less popular with the term used to refer more and more to thinly sliced raw fish. The dish was widely consumed by all classes and coincides with the appearance of the character \"kuài\" () with its fish radical (魚) during this period (alongside the character with the \"\" meat radical). In addition, characters such as \"huì\" () with the fire radical (火) were introduced to indicate fish that has grilled to the rare stage and then thinly sliced, similar to Japanese tataki. Indeed, \"kuai\" and raw fish were so commonly consumed that Ying Shao wrote in the \"Fengsu Tongyi\", a manuscript that described the odd and exotic practices of various cultures and peoples, that \"in Zhu and E, raw fish is not consumed\", alluding to the perceived oddity of not eating fish raw. It is also during this period that the renowned dish \"jinji yukuai\" (金齏玉膾) along its accompanying \"baheji\" sauce (八和齏) was created.\n\nAlthough the dish was not widely consumed in later Chinese dynasties, it enjoyed a very high status in Chinese cuisine. Chinese physicians of the time sometimes recommended against it due to the very real possibility of serious illness due to flukes and other parasitic organisms, however many prominent Chinese individuals (including Cao Zhi and Chen Deng) maintained a strong affinity for the dish. It was believed that the application of strongly flavored spices such as mustard or Sichuan pepper could render the dish safe to consume.\n\nConsumption of \"kuai\" in China declined sharply by the time of the Qing dynasty. Since that time, most Chinese food has been cooked, though a Chaozhou (Teochew) dish called \"yusheng\" uses raw fish as its primary ingredient.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "19009244", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19009244", "title": "Toast", "text": "Toast\n\nToast is a form of bread that has been browned by exposure to radiant heat. This browning is the result of a Maillard reaction altering the flavor of the bread and making it firmer so that it is easier to spread toppings on it. Toasting is a common method of making stale bread more palatable. Bread is often toasted using a \"toaster\", but toaster ovens are also used. Though many types of bread can be toasted the most commonly used is \"sliced bread\", referring to bread that is already sliced and bagged upon purchase and may be white, brown, multigrain, etc.\n\nToast is commonly eaten with butter or margarine, and sweetened toppings, such as jam or jelly. Regionally, savory spreads, such as peanut butter or yeast extracts, may also be popular. When buttered, toast may also be served as an accompaniment to savory dishes, especially soups or stews, or topped with heartier ingredients like eggs or baked beans as a light meal. Toast is a common breakfast food. While slices of bread are most common, bagels and English muffins are also toasted.\n\nScientific studies in the early 2000s found that toast may contain carcinogens (acrylamide) caused by the browning process.\n\nThe word \"toast\", which means \"sliced bread singed by heat\", derives from the Latin \"torrere\", \"to burn\". The first reference to toast in print is in a recipe for Oyle Soppys (flavoured onions stewed in a gallon of stale beer and a pint of oil) that dates from 1430. In the 1400s and 1500s, toast was discarded or eaten after it was used as a flavoring for drinks. In the 1600s, toast was still thought of as something to be put into drinks. In his 1602 play \"The Merry Wives of Windsor\", Shakespeare gives Falstaff the line: \"Go fetch me a quart of sack; put a toast in't.\" By the 1700s, there were references to \"toast\" as a gesture that indicates sexual attraction for a person: \"Ay, Madam, it has been your Life's whole Pride of late to be the Common Toast of every Publick Table.\" Toast has been used as an element of American haute cuisine since at least the 1850s.\n\nIn a modern home kitchen, the usual method of toasting bread is by the use of a toaster, an electrical appliance made for that purpose. To use a modern toaster, sliced bread is placed into the narrow slots on the top of the toaster, the toaster is tuned to the correct setting (some may have more elaborate settings than others) and a lever on the front or side is pushed down. The toast is ready when the lever pops up along with the toast. If the bread is insufficiently toasted, the lever can be pressed down again.\n\nBread toasted in a conventional toaster can \"sweat\" when it is served (i.e. water collects on the surface of the cooled toast). This occurs because moisture in the bread becomes steam while being toasted due to heat and when cooled the steam condenses into water droplets on the surface of the bread.\n\nIt can also be toasted by a conveyor toaster, which device is often used in hotels, restaurants, and other food service locations. It works by having one heating element on the top and one on the bottom with a metal conveyor belt in the middle which carries the toast between the two heating elements. This allows toast to be made consistently as more slices can be added at any time without waiting for previous ones to pop up.\n\nBread can also be toasted under a grill (or broiler), in an open oven, or lying on an oven rack. This \"oven toast\" is usually buttered before toasting. Toaster ovens are special small appliances made for toasting bread or for heating small amounts of other foods.\n\nBread can also be toasted by holding it near but not directly over an open flame, such as a campfire or fireplace; special toasting utensils (e.g. toasting forks) are made for this purpose. Before the invention of modern cooking appliances such as toasters and grills, bread has been produced in ovens for millennia, toast can be made in the same oven.\n\nMany brands of ready sliced bread are available, some of which specifically market their suitability for toasting.\n\nIn modern days, toast is most commonly eaten with butter or margarine spread over it, and may be served with preserves, spreads, or other toppings in addition to or instead of butter. Toast with jam or marmalade is popular. A few other condiments that can be enjoyed with toast are chocolate spread, cream cheese, and peanut butter. Yeast extracts such as Marmite in the UK, New Zealand and South Africa, and Vegemite in Australia are national traditions. Some sandwiches, such as the BLT, call for toast to be used rather than bread.\n\nToast is an important component of many breakfasts, and is also important in some traditional bland specialty diets for people with gastrointestinal problems such as diarrhea.\n\nIn the United Kingdom, a dish popular with children is a soft-boiled egg eaten with toast soldiers at breakfast. Strips of toast (the soldiers) are dipped into the runny yolk of a boiled egg through a hole made in the top of the eggshell, and eaten.\n\nIn southern Sri Lanka, it is common for toast to be paired with a curry soup and mint tea.\n\nBy 2013, \"artisanal toast\" had become a significant food trend in upscale American cities like San Francisco, where some commentators decried the increasing number of restaurants and bakeries selling freshly made toast at what was perceived to be an unreasonably high price.\n\nToasted bread slices may contain Benzo[\"a\"]pyrene and high levels of acrylamide, a carcinogen generated during the browning process. High acrylamide levels can also be found in other heated carbohydrate-rich foods. The darker the surface colour of the toast, the higher its concentration of acrylamide. That is why, according to the recommendations made by the British Food Standards Agency, bread should be toasted to the lightest colour acceptable.\n\nThe slang idiom \"you're toast\", \"I'm toast\", or \"we're toast\" is used to express a state of being \"outcast\", \"finished\", \"burned, scorched, wiped out, [or] demolished\" (without even the consolation of being remembered, as with the slang term \"you're history\").\" The first known use of \"toast\" as a metaphorical term for \"you're dead\" was in the film \"Ghostbusters\" (1984), in which Bill Murray's character declares, \"This chick is toast\", before the Ghostbusters attempt to burn the villain with their nuclear-powered weapons. \"Hey, dude. You're toast, man\", which appeared in \"The St. Petersburg Times\" of Oct. 1, 1987, is the \"...earliest [printed] citation the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" research staff has of this usage.\"\n\nAnother popular idiom associated with the word \"toast\" is the expression \"to toast someone's health\", which is typically done by one or more persons at a gathering by raising a glass in salute to the individual. This meaning is derived from the early meaning of toast, which from the 1400s to the 1600s meant warmed bread that was placed in a drink. By the 1700s, there were references to the drink in which toast was dunked being used in a gesture that indicates respect: \"Ay, Madam, it has been your Life's whole Pride of late to be the Common Toast of every Public Table.\"\n\nHumorous observations have been made about buttered toast. It has been noted that buttered toast has a perceived tendency, when dropped, to land with the buttered side to the floor, the least desirable outcome. Although the concept of \"dropped buttered toast\" was originally a pessimistic joke, a 2001 study of the buttered toast phenomenon found that when dropped from a table, a buttered slice of toast landed butter-side down at least 62% of the time. The phenomenon is widely believed to be attributable to the combination of the size of the toast and the height of the typical dining table, which means that the toast will not rotate far enough to right itself before encountering the floor. A joke that plays on this tendency is the buttered cat paradox; if cats always land on their feet and buttered toast always lands buttered side down, it questions what happens when buttered toast is attached to a cat's back.\n\nIn the first episode of the third season of the Fox musical dramedy \"Glee\", \"The Purple Piano Project\", Becky questions the necessity of toast, stating \"bread's already been baked; I don't get why we have to cook it again.\"\n\nAnton, one of Gumball's classmates from \"The Amazing World of Gumball\" is also a piece of toast.\n\nDrawing the process of making toast has been featured in a 2013 TED talk by Tom Wujec entitled \"Got a wicked problem? First, tell me how you make toast.\"\n\nCheese and marshmallows are also toasted by exposure to dry radiant heat. A toasted cheese sandwich features toasted cheese and toasted bread. Bagels, English muffins, Pop Tart pastries and crumpets are foods that can be toasted, too.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "19034340", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19034340", "title": "Ventricina", "text": "Ventricina\n\nVentricina is a pork sausage commonly found in the Abruzzo region of central Italy. It is similar to certain luncheon meats, included in the category English-speakers from the United States refer to as \"cold cuts\". Traditionally made using relatively low grade, very fatty pig meat cuts and encasing them in the animal's intestines or stomach while they cure. There are two principal types of ventricina: those of the area in and around the city of Teramo, and others coming from the area of Vasto.\n\nThis version of ventricina is made from pork meat with added pork fat, the latter amounting to approximately 50-60% by weight of the finished product. The meat and fat are finely ground together and various spices are then added to the mixture. Most often these include garlic, salt, ground black and white pepper, hot and bell peppers, orange peel, rosemary, bell pepper paste, and fennel seeds. Other spices are sometimes added according to the taste of the producer. Traditionally, this mixture would be encased in the bladder, stomach, or intestines of the pig. More recently, synthetic casings have been employed or the mixture is simply stored in glass containers. Ventricina is often hung to cure in a cool dark place for several months before it is eaten. Ventricina teramana (that from the area around Teramo in Abruzzo) is most often eaten when it is young and has been allowed to age only a few months. Many people spread this delicacy on an open slice of bread. If desired the bread slices can be placed on the grill or in the oven for a period of time, thereby making a kind of bruschetta.\n\nIn comparison to the Teramo ventricina, that made in Vasto contains a much lower percentage of fat, typically in the neighborhood of 30% or so. The meat in this ventricina is cut into larger cubes of about two centimeters. Spices include bell peppers, hot peppers, fennel seeds and ground pepper.\n\n"}
{"id": "19039241", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19039241", "title": "Wasta", "text": "Wasta\n\nWasta or wasata (Arabic: واسِطة \"wāsiṭah\") is an Arabic word that loosely translates into nepotism, '' or 'who you know'. It refers to using one’s connections and/or influence to get things done, including government transactions such as the quick renewal of a passport, waiving of traffic fines, and getting hired for or promoted in a job.\n\nIn other words, it amounts to getting something through favoritism rather than merit, or what is informally spoken of in English as \"pull\" from connections (the opposite of \"push\"). The English word cronyism overlaps in meaning but is not precisely the same. Roughly equivalent words in other languages include sociolismo in Cuba; blat in Russia; guanxi in Chinese and \"Vetternwirtschaft\" in German, \"protektzia\" in Israeli slang, \"un pituto\" in Chilean Spanish, In Brazilian-Portuguese it is referred to as \"pistolão\", \"QI\" (\"Quem Indica\", or Who Indicates), or in the slang \"peixada\", \"Pidi Padu\" in Malayalam, \"arka\" or \"destek\" in Turkish, \"plecy\" in Polish, \"štela\" in Bosnian.\n\nWasta is derived from the Modern Standard Arabic word واسِطَة (\"wāsiṭah\") which can mean \"medium, means\" but also \"personal connection used to gain something\". \n\nFurthermore, companies in the Arab world rarely have a 'no-nepotism' policy in place, so one can often find a workforce with friends and friends relatives who may or may not be qualified. This takes place in both the public and private sectors.\n\nIn many Arab countries, such as Oman, Iraq, Lebanon, Kuwait, UAE, Saudi Arabia and especially Jordan, wasta affects hiring and promotion decisions. This is not restricted to Arab nationals but is also practised by expatriates who use their connections as wastas.\n\nWith respect to recruitment, there seems to be a movement away from this wasta, especially in the case of multinationals and professional firms. However, wasta is still widely used in the region.\n\n"}
{"id": "19040254", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19040254", "title": "Warabimochi", "text": "Warabimochi\n\nThere are many variations of warabimochi, with the dip varying according to local taste. Popular variations include sesame and green tea dips.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "19055788", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19055788", "title": "Dragon Bleu", "text": "Dragon Bleu\n\nDragon Bleu is a French brand of vodka. It is distilled and bottled in the Grande Champagne area of France from a blend of three grains: wheat, barley, and rye. Dragon Bleu is produced by French distiller Patrick Brisset, in Saint-Preuil, France. Dragon Bleu is 40% alcohol by volume (80 proof). It is produced using the water of the Gensac Spring. This vodka fits into the high-priced category.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "19086109", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19086109", "title": "Arwa (water)", "text": "Arwa (water)\n\nArwa is a bottled water brand produced by Dubai-based Al Ahlia Group, the licensed bottler and distributor of Coca-Cola brands in the UAE and Oman. It is sold across most Middle East countries. Arwa water is produced in-house at the company's Al Ain Plant since 1990.\nalso has a plant in tulkarem, palestine\n\"Arwa Fruits\", a sparkling water variant, was launched in Bahrain in 2010. It comes in two natural flavors: strawberry and lemon.\n\n\"Arwa\" is an Arabic feminine given name. It means \"satisfied\", \"pleasant\", \"fresh\". It could also mean \"mountain goat\" or \"deer\".\n\n"}
{"id": "19087593", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19087593", "title": "Mangalorean Catholic cuisine", "text": "Mangalorean Catholic cuisine\n\nThe Mangalorean Catholic Cuisine is the cuisine of the Mangalorean Catholic community and is largely influenced by Mangalorean, Goan, and Portuguese cuisines.\n\nMangalorean Catholics are Roman Catholics from Mangalore and the former South Canara district on the southwestern coast of India. They are Konkani people and speak the Konkani language. Most of the ancestors of Mangalorean Catholics were Goan Catholics, who had migrated to South Canara from Goa, a state north of Canara, between 1560 and 1763 during the Goa Inquisition and the Portuguese-Maratha wars. The culture of Mangalorean Catholics is a blend of Mangalorean and Goan cultures. After migration, they adopted the local Mangalorean culture but retained many of their Goan customs and traditions.\n\nTheir curry uses a lot of coconut and curry leaves while ginger, garlic and chilli are also used. Mangalorean Catholic cuisine has distinct Portuguese influence as can be seen in \"Laitao\", the famous pork roast served as the \"Pièce de résistance\" at wedding dinners, and \"Pork Sorpotel\". Fabled cooks like Davidam or Alicebai were called in to help with the repast. Mangalorean Catholics mix pork blood and other parts in most of their pork delicacies as can be seen from \"Pork Bafat\", \"Cabidela\" and \"Kalleze un Kiti\" (heart and intestines). \"Sanna–Dukra Maas\" (\"Sanna\" – idli fluffed with toddy or yeast; \"Dukra Maas\" – Pork) and \"Unde–Dukra Maas\" (\"Unde\" – leavened bread; \"Dukra Maas\" – Pork) are popular dishes. \"Chicken Indaz\" is also popular. The traditional \"Rosachi kadi\" (Ros Curry), a fish curry made with \"ros\" (coconut milk) is quite popular and is served during the \"Ros\" (anointing) ceremony that is held 1 or 2 days before a Mangalorean Catholic wedding. Their fish curry especially their Fish Roe Curry, is known for its taste in the whole of coastal India while fried fish in their style is well known. The Sheveo Roce and Pathal Bakri (a variant of \"Kori Rotti\") are dry rice flakes dipped in chicken gravy dishes.\n\nThe \"\"Balthazaar Chutney\"\" is a popular condiment. The dish originated when Balthazaar, a Mangalorean Catholic nobleman, was taken prisoner by Tippu Sultan in 1784 during the Captivity of Mangalorean Catholics at Seringapatam. Unable to stomach the indifferent camp food, he offered to make a chutney for the captured Mangalorean Catholics. \n\nThe \"Pollu\", a type of Sambhar with \"Galmbi\" (powdered dried fish) or \"Kambulmas\" (Dried Tuna) is popular. The traditional \"Fode\" is a popular pickle. \"Thail Piao\", which means literally vegetables dumped with oil and onions and left to boil on the fire wood is quite popular. \"Karamb\" (Cucumber salad) and \"Foka\" (Lady’s finger combined with cashewnuts). The \"Appam\" (rice balls) and \"Panpole\" (a type of pancake) are popular delicacies made of soaked rice, water and salt. The \"Thath Bakri\" is a banana leaf rice dish made with ground red boiled rice mixed with raw scraped coconut and roasted on a tava on a banana leaf. The \"Mitais\", \"Mandas\", \"Ushae\", \"Pitae\" and \"Mani\" are well known sweet dishes.\n\"Kuswar\" is a term often used to mention a set of unique Christmas goodies which are part of the cuisine of the Mangalorean Catholic community There are as many as 22 different traditional recipes that form this distinct flavour of Christmas celebration in Mangalore. Neuries are puffs stuffed with plums, nuts, and fried theel (sesame) and sugar. \"Kidyo\" or \"Kulkuls\" are curly concoctions dipped in sugar treacle, pathekas are savoury of green \"nandarkai\" bananas, theel laddus and jaw snapping \"Golios\". Macaroons is what Manglore is famous for and the subtle flavored rose cookies are a hot favorite. But it is the Rich Plum Cake which takes the better part of a week to make. Candied fruit, plums, currents, raisins are dexterously cut and soaked in rum. Flour sieved and gently warmed in the sun. Nuts shelled and chopped and the whole family comes together to make the cake. Jobs are allotted, one to whip up the eggs, while another creams the butter and sugar, cake tins are lined, and a strong pair of arms requisitioned to do the final mixing and stirring.\n\n\"Patrode\" or \"Pathrade\", a dish of colocasia leaves stuffed with rice, dal, jaggery, coconut, and spices is also popular. The Mangalorean Catholic version of this steamed delicacy is a slight variation on the Tuluva recipe. More spicy, it is fried in \"Meet Mirsang\" (salt and chilli), a red chilli masala, which is a popular condiment used to flavour Mangalorean Catholic dishes.\n\n"}
{"id": "19090467", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19090467", "title": "Joppiesaus", "text": "Joppiesaus\n\nJoppiesaus is a Dutch snack sauce. It is a cold, yellow sauce available in fast food restaurants throughout the Netherlands and Belgium. The sauce is usually consumed with fries, hamburger or other fast food snacks.\n\nJoppiesaus was developed by the owner of a cafeteria in Glanerbrug, who herself was nicknamed Joppie. In the early 2000s the sauce gradually became ever more popular and nowadays it is available at most fast food restaurants and several supermarkets.\n\nJoppiesaus is based on vegetable oil, water and an emulsifier. It also contains onion and curry powder. The original recipe is kept a secret, but on the web one can find recipes that match the original taste closely.\n\nJoppiesaus is produced by Elite Salades & Snacks in the town of Neede. This company has bought the original recipe from the cafeteria in Glanerbrug and are the legal owners of the brand name Joppiesaus.\n\nIn February 2011 Lay's introduced a flavor of potato chips called Patatje Joppie (french fries with joppie sauce). It was the winner of a competition called \"Maak je smaak\" ('Create your own flavor').\n\n\n"}
{"id": "19092964", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19092964", "title": "Punschkrapfen", "text": "Punschkrapfen\n\nPunschkrapfen or Punschkrapferl (punch cake) is a classic Austrian confection of pastry with a fine rum flavor. It is similar to the French pastry, the petit four.\n\nToday, one can find Punschkrapfen in most pastry shops and bakeries in Austria.\n\nIt is a cake filled with cake crumbs, nougat chocolate, apricot jam and then soaked with rum. The cake is cut into 1-1/2 inch square cubes, covered with so-called Punschglasur (punch icing), a thick pink rum sugar glazing often drizzled with chocolate and a cocktail cherry on top. Nowadays, there are also Punschkrapfen in cylindrical form.\n\nIt is disputed who made the first Punschkrapfen and where it came from. It may have been introduced to Vienna in the Middle Ages by the Avars, or the Ottoman armies brought the Punschkrapfen to Vienna (the Second Turkish Siege), or it may have been invented by an imperial court confectioner.\n\nIt is said that the Punschkrapferl renders the typical Austrian character: red outside, brown inside, and always a little smashed. \"Punschkrapferl\" is a term often used by Austrians to describe Nazi politicians who joined the Social Democrats after World War II. These politicians are said to be red (a color associated with socialism) on the outside and brown (a color associated with Nazism) on the inside.\n\nRobert Menasse suggested satirically that the Punschkrapfen should become the Austrian National Symbol.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "19097338", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19097338", "title": "Dinosaur egg", "text": "Dinosaur egg\n\nDinosaur eggs are the organic vessels in which a dinosaur embryo develops. When the first scientifically documented remains of dinosaurs were being described in England during the 1820s, it was presumed that dinosaurs had laid eggs because they were reptiles. In 1859, the first scientifically documented dinosaur egg fossils were discovered in France by Jean-Jacques Poech, although they were mistaken for giant bird eggs. The first scientifically recognized dinosaur egg fossils were discovered in 1923 by an American Museum of Natural History crew in Mongolia. Since then many new nesting sites have been found all over the world and a system of classification based on the structure of eggshell was developed in China before gradually diffusing into the West. Dinosaur eggshell can be studied in thin section and viewed under a microscope. The interior of a dinosaur egg can be studied using CAT scans or by gradually dissolving away the shell with acid. Sometimes the egg preserves the remains of the developing embryo inside. The oldest known dinosaur eggs and embryos are from \"Massospondylus\", which lived during the Early Jurassic, about 190 million years ago.\n\nIn 1859, the first scientifically documented dinosaur egg fossils were discovered in southern France by a Catholic priest and amateur naturalist named Father Jean-Jacques Pouech; he thought, however, that they were laid by giant birds. The first scientifically recognized dinosaur egg fossils were discovered serendipitously in 1923 by an American Museum of Natural History crew while looking for evidence of early humans in Mongolia. These eggs were mistakenly attributed to the locally abundant herbivore \"Protoceratops\", but are now known to be \"Oviraptor\" eggs. Egg discoveries continued to mount all over the world, leading to the development of multiple competing classification schemes. In 1975 Chinese paleontologist Zhao Zi-Kui started a revolution in fossil egg classification by developing a system of \"parataxonomy\" based on the traditional Linnaean system which classified eggs based on their physical qualities rather than their hypothesized mothers. Zhao's new method of egg classification was hindered from adoption by Western scientists due to language barriers. However, in the early 1990s Russian paleontologist Konstantin Mikhailov brought attention to Zhao's work in the English language scientific literature.\n\nFossil dinosaur eggshell fragments can be recognized based on three important traits. Their thickness should be roughly uniform, they are usually slightly curved, and their surface is covered in tiny pores. Less frequently, the concave underside of the eggshell fragment will preserve bumps known as mammillae. Sometimes the embryo had absorbed so much of the calcium that the mammilae need a magnifying glass or microscope to be seen. However, there are many kinds of naturally occurring objects which can resemble fossil eggs. These can fool even professional paleontologists.\nCalculus: Calculi are egg-like objects formed in the stomachs of ruminants such as cattle, deer, elk, and goats. Calculus formation is a defense mechanism protecting the ruminant's stomach from damage if it swallows a foreign object while grazing. After ingestion, the object is covered by the same material composing bone, calcium phosphate, and eventually vomited out of the animal's system. These \"stomach stones\" tend to range in size from 1 to 6 centimeters. Larger sizes are known but very rare. Sometimes tiny dimples cover the surface of a stomach stone, which can fool observers into thinking they are the pores of an egg. Fossil egg expert Ken Carpenter has described stomach stones as the most egg-like natural objects, noting that they are \"the trickiest [egg-like] objects to correctly identify\". Calculi are so egg-like that on one occasion a detailed description of a stomach stone misidentified as a fossil egg was published in the scientific literature. Calculi can be distinguished from real egg fossils because when they are broken open, they show the layers of calcium phosphate and the foreign object at the core. Multiple layers of eggshell are known in pathological eggs, but these layers don't go all the way down to its core the way a stomach stone's do. Calculi are often suspiciously intact, unlike fossil eggs, which are usually damaged. Stomach stones also lack distinct shells with their attending structural components like continuous or prismatic layers, mammillae, and pores.\n\nConcretions: Concretions are formed when decaying organisms change the chemistry of their immediate surroundings in a manner that is conducive to minerals precipitating out of solution. These minerals accumulate in a mass roughly shaped like the region of altered chemistry. Sometimes the is egg-shaped. Most egg-shaped concretions have uniform interiors, however some form through the accumulation of mineral in layers. These layered concretions can be even harder to recognize than those with uniform interiors because the layers can resemble egg white and yolk. The yellow of the false yolk comes from minerals like limonite, siderite, and sulfur.\n\nConcretions also generally lack distinct shells, although sometimes they can appear to have them if their outside surfaces have been case-hardened. Since their interiors are softer, erosion can separate the two, creating eggshell pseudofossils. Real egg fossils should preserve eggshell structures like pores, mammillae, and prismatic or continuous layers, which are not present in concretions. Any given concretion is unlikely to be exactly the same size as any other, so associations of egg-like objects of different sizes are probably not real eggs at all. Concretions can also be far larger than any real egg so an apparently unnaturally large \"egg\" has probably been misidentified.\n\nInsect trace fossils: Sometimes the living or breeding chambers of an insect burrow are so perfectly egg-shaped that even a paleontologist can mistake a natural cast of these chambers for a fossil egg. Insect burrow fossils can sometimes be distinguished from real egg fossils by the presence of \"scratch marks\" on their surface left by the insect during the burrow's original excavation. Fossil insect pupae can also resemble eggs. After death and burial, the decomposition of a deceased pupa would leave a gap in the sediment that could be filled with minerals carried by groundwater, forming an egg-like cast. These pseudo-eggs can be recognized by their small size (usually not much longer than a centimeter or two) and lack of an eggshell with its typical anatomy.\n\nStones: The erosive effects of water can sometimes round rocks into egg-like shapes.\n\nPaleontologists' knowledge of the structure of dinosaur eggs is limited to the hard shell. However, it can be inferred that dinosaur eggs had an amnion, chorion, and an allantois, the three major membranes in modern bird and reptile eggs. Dinosaur eggs vary greatly in size and shape, but even the largest dinosaur eggs (\"Megaloolithus\") are smaller than the largest known bird eggs, which were laid by the extinct elephant bird. Dinosaur eggs range in shape from spherical to highly elongated (some specimens three times longer than they are wide). Some elongated eggs are symmetrical, whereas others have one rounded end and one pointed end (similar to bird eggs). Most elongated eggs were laid by theropods and have an avian-like eggshell, whereas the spherical eggs typically represent non-theropod dinosaurs.\n\nDinosaur eggshells are divided into one, two, or three layers of distinct ultrastructure. \n\nThe innermost layer, known as the mammillary layer or the cone layer, is only found in theropod eggs (the prismatic and ornithoid basic types). It is composed of cone-shaped structures called mammillae at the base of each shell unit. Mammillae are the first part of the eggshell to form. Each mammilla forms from crystals radiating outward from an organic core until they touch neighboring mammillae and grow upwards into the next layer. In spherulitic eggs, the eggs of non-theropod dinosaurs, the eggshell units grow upward from their organic cores; the base of each eggshell unit is rounded, but is not a true mammilla because it does not have a distinct ultrastructure from the top of the unit.\n\nThe second layer is alternately called the prismatic layer, the columnar layer, the continuous layer, the crystalline layer, the cryptoprismatic layer, the palisade layer, the spongy layer, or the single layer. In this layer, the shell units can be distinct, partially fused together, or entirely continuous. In some dinosaur eggs, the prismatic layer exhibits squamatic ultrastructure, where the prismatic structure is obscured by a rough texture resembling lizard skin.\n\nThough rare in non-avian dinosaurs, some theropod eggs and most bird eggs have a third layer (known as the external layer) made up of vertical calcite crystals.\n\nIn all eggs, the embryo must breathe. In amniotes (including dinosaurs), pore canals cutting through the eggshell allow gas exchange between the embryo and the outside world. Dinosaur eggshells exhibit a lot of diversity in pore size, density, and shape. One early attempt at classification of dinosaurian eggs, proposed by the Soviet paleontologist A. Sochava, was based on grouping eggs by their pore systems. This system was abandoned when it was discovered that different eggs could have very similar pores, but pore systems do play an important role in modern eggshell parataxonomy. The density and width of the pores, combined with the eggshell's thickness can be used to predict the gas conductance of a dinosaur's egg. This can provide both information about nesting behavior and about the climate: eggs buried in sediment have higher rates of gas conductance than those laid in the open, and eggs laid in arid environments have lower gas conductance (to prevent water loss) than those laid in more humid conditions.\n\nPaleontologist and fossil egg expert Kenneth Carpenter catalogued six types of pore systems:\n\nUnlike most modern eggs, many dinosaur eggs had a rough texture formed by nodes and ridges ornamenting the surface of their shell. This is predominant in Cretaceous dinosaur eggs, but very rare in eggs from the Jurassic or Triassic. Because of the lack of modern analogues, the purpose of eggshell ornamentation is unknown, but many functions have been proposed. Possibly, they provided extra strength to the eggshell without having pore canals too long for adequate gas exchange. They could also have helped keep substrate away from the pore openings of eggs that were buried, but modern turtles and crocodylians which bury their eggs have smooth eggshells, so this adaptation is not necessary for animals which bury their eggs. Another hypothesis, proposed by R. M. Mellon in 1982 in his senior thesis at Princeton University, is that the ridges and nodes would have formed pathways for gas to flow across the surface of the eggshell, preventing accumulation of too much CO and aiding the flow of oxygen and water vapor.\n\nSince it varies from egg to egg, the texture of an eggshell's ornamentation is useful for classification. Six types of ornamentation were catalogued by Carpenter in 1999:\n\nThe classification of dinosaur eggs is based on the structure of the egg shells viewed in thin section via microscope, although new techniques such as electron backscatter diffraction have been used. There are three main categories of dinosaur eggs: (sauropods and hadrosaurs), prismatic, and ornithoid (theropods, including modern birds).\n\nOogenera are taxonomic names for types of eggshell. Nearly three dozen oogenera have been named for dinosaur eggs:\n\n\n\n\nDinosaur embryos, the animal inside the eggs, are very rare but useful to understand ontogeny, heterochrony, and dinosaur systematics.\nEmbryo fossils are known from:\n\n\nThe formation of fossil eggs begins with the original egg itself. Not all eggs that end up fossilizing experience the death of their embryo beforehand. Fossil eggs with open tops are common and could result from the preservation of eggs that hatched successfully. Dinosaur eggs whose embryos died were likely victims of similar causes to those that kill embryos in modern reptile and bird eggs. Typical causes of death include congenital problems, diseases, suffocation from being buried too deep, inimical temperatures, or too much or too little water.\n\nWhether or not hatching was successful, burial would begin with sediments gradually entering any large openings in the shell. Even intact eggs are likely to fill with sediment once they crack under the strain of deep burial. Sometimes, though, fossilization can begin fast enough to prevent the eggs from being cracked. If the water table is high enough dissolved minerals like calcite can percolate through the pores of the eggshell. When the egg is completely filled it can become sturdy enough to withstand the weight of the overlying sediments. Not all fossil egg specimens are of complete specimens, however. Individual pieces of eggshell are much more robust than the entire egg and can be transported intact long distances from where they were originally laid.\n\nWhen the egg is buried deeply enough, the bacteria decomposing it no longer have access to oxygen and need to power their metabolisms with different substances. These physiological changes in the decomposers also alter the local environment in a way that allows certain minerals to be deposited, while others remain in solution. Generally, however, a fossilizing egg's shell keeps the same calcite it had in life, which allows scientists to study its original structure millions of years after the developing dinosaur hatched or died. However, eggs can also sometimes be altered after burial. This process is called diagenesis. One form of diagenesis is a microscopic cross-hatched pattern imposed on the eggshell by the pressure of being buried deeply. If the pressure gets severe enough, sometimes the eggshell's internal microscopic structure can be completely destroyed. Diagenesis can also happen chemically in addition to physically. The chemical conditions of a decomposing egg can make it easy for silica to be incorporated into eggshell and damage its structure. When iron-bearing substances alter eggshell it can be obvious because compounds like hematite, pyrite, and iron sulfide can turn the shell blackish or rusty colors.\n\nDinosaur eggs are known from a variety of depositional environments.\n\nBeach sands: Beach sands were a good place for dinosaurs to lay their eggs because the sand would be effective at absorbing and holding enough heat to incubate the eggs. One ancient beach deposit in northeastern Spain actually preserves about 300,000 fossil dinosaur eggs.\n\nFloodplains: Dinosaurs often laid their eggs on ancient floodplains. The mudstones deposited at these sites are therefore excellent sources of dinosaur egg fossils.\n\nSand dunes: Many dinosaur eggs have been recovered from sandstone deposits that formed in the ancient dune fields of what are now northern China and Mongolia. The presence of \"Oviraptor\" preserved in their life brooding position suggests that the eggs, nests, and parents may have been rapidly buried by sandstorms.\n\nUsually the first evidence of fossil dinosaur eggs to be discovered are shell fragments that have eroded away from the original eggs and been transported downhill by the elements. If the source eggs can be found the area must be examined for more unexposed eggs. If the paleontologists are fortunate enough to have found a nest, the number and arrangement of the eggs must be estimated. Excavation must proceed to significant depth since many dinosaur nests include multiple layers of eggs. As the underside of the nest is excavated, it would be covered by material like newspaper, tin foil, or tissue. Afterwards, the entire block is covered in multiple layers of plaster-soaked strips of burlap. When the plaster is dried, the block is undercut the rest of the way and turned over.\n\nThe fine work of cleaning the egg fossils is performed in a laboratory. Preparation usually begins from the underside of the block, which tends to be the best preserved. Because of their fragility, cleaning fossil eggs requires patience and skill. Scientists use delicate instruments like dental picks, needles, small pneumatic engraving tools, and X-Acto knives. Scientists must determine at what point to stop cleaning based on their own criteria. If eggs are fully extracted they can be more fully studied individually at the cost of information regarding the spatial relationships between eggs or if the eggs had hatched. Commercial fossil dealers tend to expose only the bottom of the eggs since the topsides might be damaged by hatching and therefore less visually appealing to potential customers.\n\nAcids can be used to learn more about fossil eggs. Diluted acetic acid or EDTA can be used to expose the microstructure of shell that has been damaged by weathering. Acids are also used to extract embryo skeletons from the egg encasing them. Even fossilized soft tissue like muscle and cartilage as well as fat globules from the original egg yolk can be uncovered using this method. Amateur paleontologist Terry Manning has been credited with groundbreaking work developing this technique. First, the paleontologist must submerge the egg in a very dilute phosphoric acid bath. Since the acid solution can penetrate the egg, every few days the specimen must be soaked in distilled water to prevent the acid from damaging the embryo before it is even exposed. If embryonic fossil bone is revealed after drying from the water bath, the exposed fossils must be delicately cleaned with fine instruments like needles and paint brushes. The exposed bone is then coated with plastic preservatives like Acryloid B67, Paraloid B72, or Vinac B15 to protect it from the acid when submerged for another round. The complete process can take months before the whole embryo is revealed. Even then only about 20% of the eggs subjected to the process reveal any embryo fossils at all.\n\nCAT scans can be used to infer the 3D structure of a fossil egg's interior by compiling images taken of slices through the egg in small regular increments. Scientists have tried to use CAT scans to look for embryo fossils contained inside the egg without having to damage the egg itself by physically extracting them. However, as of Ken Carpenter's 1999 book on dinosaur eggs, \"Eggs, Nests, and Baby Dinosaurs\", all alleged embryos discovered using this method were actually false alarms. Variations in the type of infilling mineral or cement binding the infilling sediment into rock sometimes resemble bones in CAT scan images. Sometimes eggshell fragments that fell back into the egg when it hatched have been mistaken for embryonic bones. The use of CAT scans to search for embryonic remains is actually conceptually flawed since embryonic bones have not yet mineralized. Since the infilling sediment is their only source of minerals they will be preserved at basically the same density and therefore have poor visibility in the scan. The validity of this issue has been confirmed by performing Cat scans on fossil eggs known to have embryos inside and noting their poor visibility in the scan images. The only truly reliable way to discover a dinosaur embryo is to cut the egg open or dissolve some of its eggshell away.\n\nCathodoluminescence is the most important tool paleontologists have for revealing whether or not the calcium in fossil eggshell has been altered. Calcite in eggshell is either pure or rich in calcium carbonate. However, the calcite composing the egg can be altered after burial to include significant calcium content. Cathodoluminescence causes calcite altered in this fashion to glow orange.\n\nGel electrophoresis has been used in attempts to identify the amino acids present in the organic components of dinosaur eggshell. Contact with human skin can contaminate eggs with foreign amino acids, so only untouched eggs can be investigated using this technique. EDTA can be used to dissolve the calcite of the eggshell while leaving the shell's organic content intact. The resultant organic residue would be blended and then implanted into gel. Electricity would then be run through the sample, causing the amino acids to migrate through the gel until they stop at levels determined by their physical properties. Protein silver stain is then used to dye the amino acids and make them visible. The bands of amino acids from the dinosaur eggs can then be compared with the banding of samples with known composition for identification.\n\nGel electrophoresis is not necessarily a perfect means of discovering the amino acid composition of dinosaur eggshell because sometimes the amount or type of amino acids present could be altered during or after preservation. One potential confounding factor would be the heating of deeply buried egg fossils, which can break down amino acids. Another potential source of error is groundwater, which can leach away amino acids. These issues cast doubt as to whether the results these sorts of studies give are reliable as the actual composition of the eggshell's organic material in life. However, studies applying these techniques have made suggestive findings, including amino acid profiles in dinosaur eggs similar to those in modern birds.\n\nThe Geneva Lens Measure is a device used to measure curved surfaces. It is most commonly used by opticians to measure lenses but can also be used by paleontologists to estimate the life size of dinosaur eggs from shell fragments. The instrument can be used to help estimate the size of fossil eggshells by measuring their curved surfaces. Since most eggs aren't perfectly round measurements from multiple parts of the egg with varying shell curvatures may be needed to get a full idea of the egg's size. Ideally an eggshell fragment being used to estimate the full size of an egg should be more than 3 cm long. Smaller eggshell fragments are better suited to other methods of study, like the Obrig radius dial gauge. The Geneva Lens measure gives units in diopters which must be converted to the radius in millimeters. Use of the Geneva Lens Measure to estimate the size of a fossil egg was first done by Sauer on fossil ostrich eggs.\n\nLight microscopy can be used to magnify the structure of dinosaur eggshell for scientific research. To do so an eggshell fragment must be embedded in epoxy resin and sliced into a thin section with a thin-bladed rock saw. This basic method was invented by French paleontologist Paul Gervais and has remained almost unchanged ever since. Horizontally cut thin sections are called tangential thin sections while vertically cut thin sections are called radial sections. Regardless of direction, the sample must be abraded by fine-grit sand or emery paper until it is translucent. Then the structure of the shell's calcite crystals or pores can be examined under a petrographic microscope. The calcite crystal structure of dinosaur eggshell can be classified by their effect on polarized light. Calcite is capable of acting as a polarizing light filter. When a microscopic thin section sample is rotated relative to polarized light it can eventually block all the light and seem opaque. This phenomenon is called extinction. Different varieties of dinosaur eggs with their different calcite crystal structures have different light extinction properties that can be used to identify and distinguish even eggs that seem very similar on the surface. To reconstruct the three-dimensional structures of the shell's pore channels scientists require a series of multiple radial sections.\n\nScanning electron microscopy is used to view dinosaur eggshell under even greater magnification than is possible with light microscopy. However, this does not mean that scanning electron microscopy is necessarily the superior research method. Since both techniques provide differing amounts and types of information they can be used together synergistically to provide a more complete understanding of the specimen under scrutiny. Eggshell specimens best suited for scanning electron microscopy are those recently broken because such a break will usually occur along the plane of the eggshell's calcite crystal lattice. First, a small specimen would be covered with a very thin layer of gold or platinum. The specimen would then be bombarded with electrons. The electrons bounce back off the metal and due to their small size, can be used to form a detailed image of the specimen.\n\nMass spectrometry is a method for determining eggshell composition that uses a device called a mass spectrometer. First, the eggshell sample must be powdered and placed in the mass spectrometer's vacuum chamber. The powder is vaporized by the heat of an intense laser beam. A stream of electrons then bombard the gaseous eggshell molecules, which breaks down the molecules in the eggshell and imbues them with a positive charge. A magnetic field then sorts them by mass before they are detected by the spectrometer. One application of mass spectrometry has been to study the isotope ratios of dinosaur eggshell in order to ascertain their diets and living conditions. However this research is complicated by the fact that isotope ratios can be altered post mortem before or during fossilization. Bacterial decomposition can alter carbon isotope ratios in eggs and groundwater can alter the oxygen isotope ratios of eggshell.\n\nX-ray equipment, like CAT scans, are used to study the interior of fossil eggs. Unlike CAT scans, x-ray imaging condenses the entire interior of the egg into a single two-dimensional image rather than a series of images documenting the interior in three dimensions. X-ray imaging in the context of dinosaur research has generally been used to look for evidence of embryonic fossils contained inside the egg. However, as of Kenneth Carpenter's 1999 book \"Eggs, Nests, and Baby Dinosaurs\", all putative embryos discovered using x-rays have been misidentifications. This is because the use of x-rays to find embryos is conceptually flawed. Embryo bones are incompletely developed and will generally lack their own mineral content, as such the only source of minerals for these bones is the sediment that fills the egg after burial. The fossilized bones will therefore have the same density as the sediment filling the interior of the egg which served as the source for their mineral content and will be poorly visible in an x-ray image. So far the only reliable method for examining embryonic fossils preserved in dinosaur eggs is to physically extract them through means such as acid dissolution.\n\nX-rays can be used to chemically analyze dinosaur eggshell. This technique requires pure shell samples, so the fossil must be completely free of its surrounding rock matrix. The shell must then be further cleaned by an ultrasonic bath. The sample can then be bombarded by electrons emitted by the same sort of probe used by scanning electron microscopes. Upon impact with the samples x-rays are emitted that can be used to identify the composition of the shell.\n\nX-ray diffraction is a method for determining eggshell composition that uses X-rays to directly bombard powdered eggshell. Upon impact some of the x-rays will be diffracted at different angles and intensities depending on the specific elements present in the eggshell.\n\nAllosterics\n\nIn order to test out how allosterics played a part in dinosaur egg size, scientists used modern day animal species such as birds, crocodiles, and tortoises in their experiment. They set the bird group as the representing the theropods with the reptiles representing the sauropod group. The laid eggs of each species where compared with one another over the course of the study as well as against the fossilized eggs. The results that was retrieved from the experiment was that while sauropods laid smaller eggs in greater amounts each year, dinosaur of the theropod group was revealed to lay larger eggs less frequently over the years, similar to modern birds today.\n\n"}
{"id": "19110453", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19110453", "title": "Sasanishiki", "text": "Sasanishiki\n\nSasanishiki is a Japanese rice from Sendai, Japan.\n\nSasanishiki was created as a mixture of Hatsunishiki and Sasashigure at Furukawa Agricultural Experiment Station in Miyagi prefecture in Japan in 1963. The unique feature of this particular kind of Japanese rice is its ability to keep the same taste even when cooling down. This makes it good for sushi, and some sushi restaurants in Japan advertise the use of this rice.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "19114936", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19114936", "title": "Fish soup", "text": "Fish soup\n\nFish soup is a food made by combining fish or seafood with vegetables and stock, juice, water, or another liquid. Hot soups are additionally characterized by boiling solid ingredients in liquids in a pot until the flavors are extracted, forming a broth.\n\nTraditionally, soups are classified into two main groups: \"clear soups\" and \"thick soups\". The established French classifications of clear soups are \"bouillon\" and \"consommé\". Thick soups are classified depending upon the type of thickening agent used: \"bisques\" are made from puréed shellfish or vegetables thickened with \"cream\"; cream soups may be thickened with béchamel sauce; and \"veloutés\" are thickened with eggs, butter, and cream. Other ingredients commonly used to thicken soups and broths include rice, lentils, flour, and grains; many popular soups also include carrots and potatoes.\n\nFish soups are similar to fish stews, and in some cases there may not be a clear distinction between the two; however, fish soups generally have more liquid than stews.\n\nFish soups have been made since early times. Some soups are served with large chunks of fish or vegetables left in the liquid, while a broth is a flavored liquid usually derived from simmering a food or vegetable for a period of time in a stock. Bisques are heavy cream soups traditionally prepared with shellfish, but can be made with any type of seafood or puree of vegetables or fruits. Cream soups are flavored broths thickened with a white sauce. Although they may be consumed on their own, or with a meal, the canned, condensed form of cream soup is sometimes used as a quick sauce in a variety of meat and pasta convenience food dishes, such as casseroles. Similar to a bisque, chowders are thick soups usually containing seafood and potatoes, milk and cream.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "19116613", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19116613", "title": "Dominica cuisine", "text": "Dominica cuisine\n\nDominica cuisine is the cuisine of the island nation of Dominica. The cuisine is rooted in creole techniques with local produce flavored by spices found on the island.\n\nDominica's cuisine is similar to many other Caribbean islands including that of Trinidad and St Lucia. Though separated by water Dominica and other Commonwealth Caribbean islands have distinct twists to their meals. \n\nBreakfast is an important meal in Dominica and is eaten every day. A typical meal includes saltfish, which is dried and salted codfish, and bakes made by making a dough and frying in oil prove popular before a long days at work. Saltfish and bakes can also double as fast food snacks that can be eaten throughout the day; vendors and Dominica's streets sell these snacks to passers-by alongside fried chicken, fish and tasty smoothies. Other breakfast meals include cornmeal porridge which is made with fine cornmeal or polenta, milk and condensed milk and sugar to sweeten. More British influenced meals like eggs, bacon and toast are also popular alongside fried fish and plantains. \n\nCommon vegetables eaten during lunchtime or dinner include plantains, tania, yams, potatoes, rice, and peas. Meat and poultry typically eaten include chicken (which is very popular), beef, fish which are normally stewed down with onions, carrots, garlic, ginger and herbs like thyme and using the browning method to create a rich dark sauce. Popular meals include rice and peas, Stew chicken, Stew beef, fried and stewed fish and many different types of hearty fish broths and Soups which are packed full with dumplings, carrots and ground provisions.\n\nRoadside stands and small-town restaurants typically serve fried chicken, fish-and-chips and \"tasty bakes\" which are fried dough made with flour, water and sugar or sometimes salt, along with cold drinks. The island produces numerous exotic fruits, including bananas, coconuts, papayas, guavas, pineapples, and mangoes which can be eaten as dessert and be pureed or liquefied.\n\nDominica's national dish is the mountain chicken, which are snares of the legs of a frog called the Crapaud, which is endemic to Dominica and Montserrat. Found at higher elevations, it's a protected species and can only be caught between autumn and February.\n\nRivers flowing down from the mountains provide Dominica with an abundant supply of freshwater. Drinks include rum punch and freshly made smoothies. \n\nDominica tea culture has a long history. Many traditional medicinal teas have origins with the original Carib culture of the island. Dominica brews its own beer under the Kubuli label.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "19116930", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19116930", "title": "Digital microscope", "text": "Digital microscope\n\nA digital microscope is a variation of a traditional optical microscope that uses optics and a digital camera to output an image to a monitor, sometimes by means of software running on a computer. A digital microscope often has its own in-built LED light source, and differs from an optical microscope in that there is no provision to observe the sample directly through an eyepiece. Since the image is focused on the digital circuit, the entire system is designed for the monitor image. The optics for the human eye are omitted.\n\nDigital microscopes are commonly low priced commercial microscopes designed for use with a computer, although advanced systems that do not require a separate computer can cost tens of thousands of dollars. The low price commercial microscopes normally omit the optics for illumination (for example Köhler illumination and phase contrast illumination) and are more akin to webcams with a macro lens. For information about stereo microscopes with a digital camera in research and development, see optical microscope.\n\nAn early digital microscope was made by a company in Tokyo, Japan in 1986, which is now known as Hirox Co. LTD . It included a control box and a lens connected to a computer. The original connection to the computer was analog through an S-video connection. Over time that connection was changed to Firewire 800 to handle a large amount of digital information coming from the digital camera. But some of their current advanced versions are all-in-one and do not require a computer. The most advanced all-in-one systems now have HD monitors built-in.\nThe invention of the USB port resulted in a multitude of USB microscopes ranging in quality and magnification. They continue to fall in price, especially compared with traditional optical microscopes. They offer high-resolution images which are normally recorded directly to a computer, and which also use the computer power for their built-in LED light source. The resolution is directly related to the number of megapixels available on a specific model, from 1.3 MP, 2 MP, 5 MP and upwards.\n\nA primary difference between a stereo microscope and a digital microscope is the magnification. With a stereo microscope, the magnification is found by multiplying the lens magnification by the eyepiece magnification. Since the digital microscope does not have an eyepiece, the magnification cannot be found using this method. Instead the magnification for a digital microscope is found by how many times larger the sample is reproduced on the monitor. Therefore, the magnification will depend on the size of the monitor. The average digital microscope system, which has a 15\" monitor, would result in an average difference in magnification between an optical microscope and a digital microscope of about 40%. Thus the magnification number of a stereomicroscope is usually 40% less than the magnification number of a digital microscope.\n\nSince the digital microscope has the image projected directly on to the CCD camera, it is possible to have higher quality recorded images than with a stereo microscope. With the stereo microscope, the lenses are made for the optics of the eye. Attaching a CCD camera to a stereo microscope will result in an image that has compromises made for the eyepiece. Although the monitor image and recorded image may be of higher quality with the digital microscope, the application of the microscope may dictate which microscope is preferred.\nWith a typical 2 megapixel CCD, a 1600×1200 pixels image is generated. The resolution of the image depends on the field of view of the lens used with the camera. The approximate pixel resolution can be determined by dividing the horizontal field of view (FOV) by 1600.\n\nIncreased resolution can be accomplished by creating a sub-pixel image. The Pixel Shift Method uses an actuator to physically move the CCD in order to take multiple overlapping images. By combining the images within the microscope, sub-pixel resolution can be generated. This method provides sub-pixel information, averaging a standard image is also a proven method to provide sub-pixel information.\n\nMost of the high-end digital microscope systems have the ability to measure samples in 2D. The measurements are done onscreen by measuring the distance from pixel to pixel. This allows for length, width, diagonal, and circle measurements as well as much more. Some systems are even capable of counting particles.\n\n3D measurement is achieved with a digital microscope by image stacking. Using a step motor, the system takes images from the lowest focal plane in the field of view to the highest focal plane. Then it reconstructs these images into a 3D model based on contrast to give a 3D color image of the sample. From these 3D model measurements can be made, but their accuracy is based on the step motor and depth of field of the lens.\n\n2D and 3D tiling, also known as stitching or creating a panoramic, can now be done with the more advanced digital microscope systems. In 2D tiling the image is automatically tiled together seamlessly in real-time by moving the XY stage. 3D tiling combines the XY stage movement of 2D tiling with the Z-axis movement of 3D measurement to create a 3D panoramic.\n\nDigital microscopes range from inexpensive units costing from perhaps US$20, which connect to a computer via USB connector, to units costing tens of thousands of dollars. These advanced digital microscope systems usually are self-contained and do not require a computer. \nSome of the cheaper microscopes which connect via USB have no stand, or a simple stand with clampable joints. They are essentially very simple webcams with small lenses and sensors—and can be used to view subjects which are not very close to the lens— mechanically arranged to allow focus at very close distances. Magnification is typically claimed to be user-adjustable from 10× to 200-400×.\n\nDevices which connect to a computer require software to operate. The basic operation includes viewing the microscope image and recording \"snapshots\". More advanced functionality, possible even with simpler devices, includes recording moving images, time-lapse photography, measurement, image enhancement, annotation, etc. Many of the simpler units which connect to a computer use standard operating system facilities, and do not require device-specific drivers. A consequence of this is that many different microscope software packages can be used interchangeably with different microscopes, although such software may not support features unique to the more advanced devices. Basic operation may be possible with software included as part of computer operating systems—in Windows XP, images from microscopes which do not require special drivers can be viewed and recorded from \"Scanners and Cameras\" in Control Panel.\n\nThe more advanced digital microscope units have stands that hold the microscope and allow it to be racked up and down, similarly to standard optical microscopes. Calibrated movement in all three dimensions may be available. The resolution, image quality, and dynamic range vary with price. Systems with a lower number of pixels have a higher frame rate (30fps) and faster processing. The faster processing can be seen when using functions like HDR (high dynamic range). In addition to general-purpose microscopes, instruments specialised for specific applications are produced. These units can have a magnification range up to 0-7000x, are usually all-in-one (don't require a computer), and can be portable. They also differ from the cheaper USB microscopes in not only the quality of the image, but the quality of the system's construction giving these types of systems a longer lifetime.\n\n"}
{"id": "19150105", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19150105", "title": "Trousers", "text": "Trousers\n\nTrousers (British English) or pants (American English) are an item of clothing that might have originated in East Asia, worn from the waist to the ankles, covering both legs separately (rather than with cloth extending across both legs as in robes, skirts, and dresses).\n\nIn the United Kingdom, the word \"pants\" generally means underwear and not trousers. Shorts are similar to trousers, but with legs that come down only to around the area of the knee, higher or lower depending on the style of the garment. To distinguish them from shorts, trousers may be called \"long trousers\" in certain contexts such as school uniform, where tailored shorts may be called \"short trousers\", especially in the UK.\n\nThe oldest known trousers are found at the Yanghai cemetery in Turpan, Xinjiang, western China, dated to the period between the 13th and the 10th centuries BC. Made of wool, the trousers had straight legs and wide crotches, and were likely made for horseback riding.\n\nIn most of Europe, trousers have been worn since ancient times and throughout the Medieval period, becoming the most common form of lower-body clothing for adult males in the modern world, although shorts are also widely worn, and kilts and other garments may be worn in various regions and cultures. Breeches were worn instead of trousers in early modern Europe by some men in higher classes of society. Distinctive formal trousers are traditionally worn with formal and semi-formal day attire. Since the mid-20th century, trousers have increasingly been worn by women as well.\n\nJeans, made of denim, are a form of trousers for casual wear widely worn all over the world by both sexes. Shorts are often preferred in hot weather or for some sports and also often by children and adolescents. Trousers are worn on the hips or waist and may be held up by their own fastenings, a belt or suspenders (braces).\n\nIn Scotland, trousers are occasionally known as \"trews\", which is the historic root of the word \"trousers\". Trousers are also known as in Scots, a word related to \"breeches\". The item of clothing worn under trousers is underpants. The standard form \"trousers\" is also used, but it is sometimes pronounced in a manner approximately represented by , as Scots did not completely undergo the Great Vowel Shift, and thus retains the vowel sound of the Gaelic from which the word originates.\n\nIn North America, Australia, South Africa and Northern England \"pants\" is the general category term, whereas \"trousers\" (sometimes \"slacks\" in Australia and the United States) often refers more specifically to tailored garments with a waistband, belt-loops, and a fly-front. So informal elastic-waist knitted garments would be called \"pants\", but not \"trousers\" (or \"slacks\").\n\nNorth Americans call undergarments \"underwear\", \"underpants\", \"undies\", \"jockey shorts\", \"shorts\", \"long johns\" or \"panties\" (the last are women's garments specifically) to distinguish them from other pants that are worn on the outside. The term \"drawers\" normally refers to undergarments, but in some dialects, may be found as a synonym for \"breeches\", that is, trousers. In these dialects, the term \"underdrawers\" is used for undergarments. Many North Americans refer to their undergarments by their type, such as \"boxers\" or \"briefs\".\n\nIn Australia, men's underwear also has various informal terms including \"under-dacks\", \"undies\", \"dacks\" or \"jocks\". In New Zealand men's underwear is known informally as \"undies\" or \"dacks\".\n\nVarious people in the tailoring and the fashion industry use the words \"trouser\" (or \"pant\") instead of \"trousers\" (or \"pants\") as a generic term, for instance when discussing styles, such as \"a flared trouser\", rather than as a specific item. The words \"trousers\" and \"pants\" are \"pluralia tantum\", nouns that generally only appear in plural form—much like the words \"scissors\" and \"tongs\", and as such \"pair or trousers\" is the usual correct form. However, the singular form is used in some compound words, such as \"trouser-leg\", \"trouser-press\" and \"trouser-bottoms\".\n\nJeans are trousers typically made from denim or dungaree cloth. Skin-tight leggings are commonly referred to as \"tights\".\n\nThere is some evidence, from figurative art, of trousers being worn in the Upper Paleolithic, as seen on the figurines found at the Siberian sites of Mal'ta and Buret'. The oldest known trousers are found at the Yanghai cemetery, extracted from mummies in Turpan, Xinjiang, western China, belonging to the Eastern Iranian people of the Tarim Basin; dated to the period between the 13th and the 10th century BC and made of wool, the trousers had straight legs and wide crotches, and were likely made for horseback riding.\n\nTrousers enter recorded history in the 6th century BC, on the rock carvings and artworks of Persepolis, and with the appearance of horse-riding Eurasian nomads in Greek ethnography. At this time, Iranian peoples such as Scythians, Sarmatians, Sogdians and Bactrians among others, along with Armenians and Eastern and Central Asian peoples such as the Xiongnu and Hunnu, are known to have worn trousers. Trousers are believed to have been worn by both sexes among these early users.\n\nThe ancient Greeks used the term \"ἀναξυρίδες\" (\"anaxyrides\") for the trousers worn by Eastern nations and \"σαράβαρα\" (\"sarabara\") for the loose trousers worn by the Scythians. However, they did not wear trousers since they thought them ridiculous, using the word \"θύλακοι\" (\"thulakoi\"), pl. of \"θύλακος\" (\"thulakos\"), \"sack\", as a slang term for the loose trousers of Persians and other Middle Easterners.\n\nRepublican Rome viewed the draped clothing of Greek and Minoan (Cretan) culture as an emblem of civilisation and disdained trousers as the mark of barbarians. As the Empire expanded beyond the Mediterranean basin, however, the greater warmth provided by trousers led to their adoption. Two types of trousers eventually saw widespread use in Rome: the \"Feminalia\", which fit snugly and usually fell to knee or mid-calf length, and the \"Braccae\", a loose-fitting trouser that was closed at the ankles. Both garments were adopted originally from the Celts of Europe, although later familiarity with the Persian Near East and the Teutons increased acceptance. Feminalia and Braccae both began use as military garments, spreading to civilian dress later, and were eventually made in a variety of materials including leather, wool, cotton and silk.\nTrousers of various designs were worn throughout the Middle Ages in Europe, especially by men. Loose-fitting trousers were worn in Byzantium under long tunics, and were worn by many tribes, such as the Germanic tribes that migrated to the Western Roman Empire in Late Antiquity and the Early Middle Ages, as evidenced by both artistic sources and such relics as the 4th-century costumes recovered from the Thorsberg peat bog (see illustration). Trousers in this period, generally called \"brais\", varied in length and were often closed at the cuff or even had attached foot coverings, although open-legged pants were also seen.\n\nBy the 8th century there is evidence of the wearing in Europe of two layers of trousers, especially among upper-class males. The under layer is today referred to by costume historians as \"drawers\", although that usage did not emerge until the late 16th century. Over the drawers were worn trousers of wool or linen, which in the 10th century began to be referred to as breeches in many places. Tightness of fit and length of leg varied by period, class, and geography. (Open legged trousers can be seen on the Norman soldiers of the Bayeux Tapestry.)\n\nAlthough Charlemagne (742–814) is recorded to have habitually worn trousers, donning the Byzantine tunic only for ceremonial occasions, the influence of the Roman past and the example of Byzantium led to the increasing use of long tunics by men, hiding most of the trousers from view and eventually rendering them an undergarment for many. As undergarments, these trousers became briefer or longer as the length of the various medieval outer garments changed, and were met by, and usually attached to, another garment variously called hose or stockings.\n\nIn the 14th century it became common among the men of the noble and knightly classes to connect the hose directly to their pourpoints (the padded under jacket worn with armoured breastplates that would later evolve into the doublet) rather than to their drawers. In the 15th century, rising hemlines led to ever briefer drawers until they were dispensed with altogether by the most fashionable elites who joined their skin-tight hose back into trousers. These trousers, which we would today call tights but which were still called hose or sometimes joined hose at the time, emerged late in the 15th century and were conspicuous by their open crotch which was covered by an independently fastening front panel, the codpiece. The exposure of the hose to the waist was consistent with 15th-century trends, which also brought the pourpoint/doublet and the shirt, previously undergarments, into view, but the most revealing of these fashions were only ever adopted at court and not by the general population.\n\nMen's clothes in Hungary in the 15th century consisted of a shirt and trousers as underwear, and a dolman worn over them, as well as a short fur-lined or sheepskin coat. Hungarians generally wore simple trousers, only their colour being unusual; the dolman covered the greater part of the trousers.\n\nAround the turn of the 16th century it became conventional to separate hose into two pieces, one from the waist to the crotch which fastened around the top of the legs, called trunk hose, and the other running beneath it to the foot. The trunk hose soon reached down the thigh to fasten below the knee and were now usually called \"breeches\" to distinguish them from the lower-leg coverings still called \"hose\" or, sometimes \"stockings\". By the end of the 16th century, the codpiece had also been incorporated into breeches which featured a \"fly\" or \"fall front\" opening.\n\nAs a modernisation measure, Tsar Peter the Great of Russia issued a decree in 1701 commanding every Russian man, other than clergy and peasant farmers, to wear trousers.\n\nDuring the French Revolution of 1789 and following, male citizens of France adopted a working-class costume including ankle-length trousers, or pantaloons (named from a Commedia dell'Arte character named \"Pantalone\") in place of the aristocratic knee-breeches (\"culottes\"). (Compare \"sans-culottes\".) The new garment of the revolutionaries differed from that of the \"ancien regime\" upper classes in three ways:\n\n\nPantaloons became fashionable in early 19th-century England and the Regency era. The style was introduced by Beau Brummell (1778-1840) and by mid-century had supplanted breeches as fashionable street-wear. At this point, even knee-length pants adopted the open bottoms of trousers (see shorts) and were worn by young boys, for sports, and in tropical climates. Breeches proper survived into the 20th century as court dress, and also in baggy mid-calf (or three-quarter length) versions known as plus-fours or knickers worn for active sports and by young schoolboys. Types of breeches are still worn today by baseball and American football players, and by equestrians.\n\nSailors may have played a role in the worldwide dissemination of trousers as a fashion. In the 17th and 18th centuries, sailors wore baggy trousers known as \"galligaskins\". Sailors also pioneered the wearing of jeans - trousers made of denim. These became more popular in the late 19th century in the American West because of their ruggedness and durability.\n\nStarting around the mid-19th century, Wigan pit-brow girls scandalised Victorian society by wearing trousers for their work at the local coal mines. They wore skirts over their trousers and rolled them up to their waists to keep them out of the way. Although pit-brow lasses worked above ground at the pit-head, their task of sorting and shovelling coal involved hard manual labour, so wearing the usual long skirts of the time would have greatly hindered their movements.\n\nThe Korean word for trousers, \"baji\" (originally \"pajibaji\") first appears in recorded history around the turn of the 15th century, but pants may have been in use by Korean society for some time. From at least this time pants were worn by both sexes in Korea. Men wore trousers either as outer garments or beneath skirts, while it was unusual for adult women to wear their pants (termed \"sokgot\") without a covering skirt. As in Europe, a wide variety of styles came to define regions, time periods and age and gender groups, from the unlined \"gouei\" to the padded \"sombaji\".\n\nSee also the \"Laws\" section below in this article.\n\nIn Western society, it was Eastern culture that inspired French designer Paul Poiret (1879–1944) to be one of the first to design pants for women. In 1913, Poiret created loose-fitting, wide-leg trousers for women called harem pants, which were based on the costumes of the popular opera \"Sheherazade\". Written by Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov in 1888, Sheherazade was based on a collection of legends from the Middle East called 1001 Arabian Nights.\n\nIn the early 20th century women air pilots and other working women often wore trousers. Frequent photographs from the 1930s of actresses Marlene Dietrich and Katharine Hepburn in trousers helped make trousers acceptable for women. During World War II, women working in factories and doing other forms of \"men's work\" on war service wore trousers when the work demanded it. In the post-war era, trousers became acceptable casual wear for gardening, the beach, and other leisurely pursuits. Further, in Britain during World War II, because of the rationing of clothing, many women took to wearing their husbands' civilian clothes, including their trousers, to work while their husbands were away from home serving in the armed forces. This was partly because they were seen as practical workwear and partly to allow women to keep their clothing allowance for other uses. As this practice of wearing trousers became more widespread and as the men's clothing wore out, replacements were needed. By the summer of 1944, it was reported that sales of women's trousers were five times more than they had been in the previous year.\n\nIn 1919, Luisa Capetillo challenged mainstream society by becoming the first woman in Puerto Rico to wear trousers in public. Capetillo was sent to jail for what was then considered to be a crime, but, the judge later dropped the charges against her.\n\nIn the 1960s, André Courrèges introduced long trousers for women as a fashion item, leading to the era of the pantsuit and designer jeans and the gradual erosion of social prohibitions against girls and women wearing trousers in schools, the workplace and in fine restaurants.\n\nIn 1969, Rep. Charlotte Reid (R-Ill.) became the first woman to wear trousers in the US Congress.\n\nPat Nixon was the first American First Lady to wear trousers in public.\n\nIn 1989, California state senator Rebecca Morgan became the first woman to wear trousers in a US state senate.\n\nHillary Clinton was the first woman to wear trousers in an official American First Lady portrait.\n\nIn Rome in 1992, a 45-year-old driving instructor was accused of rape. When he picked up an 18-year-old girl for her first driving lesson, he allegedly raped her for an hour, then told her that if she was to tell anyone he would kill her. Later that night she told her parents and her parents agreed to help her press charges. While the alleged rapist was convicted and sentenced, the Italian Supreme Court overturned the conviction in 1998 because the victim wore tight jeans. It was argued that she must have necessarily have had to help her attacker remove her jeans, thus making the act consensual (\"because the victim wore very, very tight jeans, she had to help him remove them...and by removing the jeans...it was no longer rape but consensual sex\"). The Italian Supreme Court stated in its decision “it is a fact of common experience that it is nearly impossible to slip off tight jeans even partly without the active collaboration of the person who is wearing them.” This ruling sparked widespread feminist protest. The day after the decision, women in the Italian Parliament protested by wearing jeans and holding placards that read “Jeans: An Alibi for Rape.” As a sign of support, the California Senate and Assembly followed suit. Soon Patricia Giggans, Executive Director of the Los Angeles Commission on Assaults Against Women, (now Peace Over Violence) made Denim Day an annual event. As of 2011 at least 20 U.S. states officially recognize Denim Day in April. Wearing jeans on this day has become an international symbol of protest. As of 2008 the Italian Supreme Court has overturned their findings, and there is no longer a \"denim\" defense to the charge of rape.\n\nWomen were not allowed to wear trousers on the US Senate floor until 1993. In 1993, Senators Barbara Mikulski and Carol Moseley Braun wore trousers onto the floor in defiance of the rule, and female support staff followed soon after, with the rule being amended later that year by Senate Sergeant-at-Arms Martha Pope to allow women to wear trousers on the floor so long as they also wore a jacket.\n\nIn Malawi women were not legally allowed to wear trousers under President Kamuzu Banda's rule until 1994. This law was introduced in 1965.\n\nSince 2004 the International Skating Union has allowed women to wear trousers instead of skirts in competition.\n\nIn 2009, journalist Lubna Hussein was fined the equivalent of $200 when a court found her guilty of violating Sudan's decency laws by wearing trousers.\n\nIn 2012 the Royal Canadian Mounted Police began to allow women to wear trousers and boots with all their formal uniforms.\n\nIn 2012 and 2013, some Mormon women participated in \"Wear Pants to Church Day\", in which they wore trousers to church instead of the customary dresses to encourage gender equality within The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Over one thousand women participated in this in 2012.\n\nIn 2013, Turkey's parliament ended a ban on women lawmakers wearing trousers in its assembly.\n\nAlso in 2013, an old bylaw requiring women in Paris, France to ask permission from city authorities before \"dressing as men\", including wearing trousers (with exceptions for those \"holding a bicycle handlebar or the reins of a horse\") was declared officially revoked by France's Women's Rights Minister, Najat Vallaud-Belkacem. The bylaw was originally intended to prevent women from wearing the pantalons fashionable with Parisian rebels in the French Revolution.\n\nIn 2014, an Indian family court in Mumbai ruled that a husband objecting to his wife wearing a kurta and jeans and forcing her to wear a sari amounts to cruelty inflicted by the husband and can be a ground to seek divorce. The wife was thus granted a divorce on the ground of cruelty as defined under section 27(1)(d) of Special Marriage Act, 1954.\n\nUntil 2016 some female crew members on British Airways were required to wear British Airways’ standard \"ambassador\" uniform, which has not traditionally included trousers.\n\nIn 2017, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints announced that its female employees could wear \"professional pantsuits and dress slacks\" while at work; dresses and skirts had previously been required. In 2018 it was announced that female missionaries of that church could wear dress slacks if they wanted, except when attending the temple and during Sunday worship services, baptismal services, and mission leadership and zone conferences.\n\nIn 2019, Virgin Atlantic began to allow its female flight attendants to wear pants.\n\nPleats just below the waistband on the front typify many styles of formal and casual trousers, including suit trousers and khakis. There may be one, two, three, or no pleats, which may face either direction. When the pleats open towards the pockets they are called reverse pleats (typical of most trousers today) and when they open toward the fly they are known as forward pleats.\n\nTrouser-makers can finish the legs by hemming the bottom to prevent fraying. Trousers with turn-ups (cuffs in American English), after hemming, are rolled outward and sometimes pressed or stitched into place.\n\nA fly is a covering over an opening join concealing the mechanism, such as a zipper, velcro or buttons, used to join the opening. In trousers, this is most commonly an opening covering the groin, which makes the pants easier to put on or take off. The opening also allows men to urinate without lowering their trousers.\n\nTrousers have varied historically in whether or not they have a fly. Originally, hose did not cover the area between the legs. This was instead covered by a doublet or by a codpiece. When breeches were worn, during the Regency period for example, they were fall-fronted (or broad fall). Later, after trousers (pantaloons) were invented, the fly-front (split fall) emerged. The panelled front returned as a sporting option, such as in riding breeches, but is now hardly ever used, a fly being by far the most common fastening. Most flies now use a zipper, though button-fly pants continue to be available.\n\nAt present, most trousers are held up through the assistance of a belt which is passed through the belt loops on the waistband of the trousers. However, this was traditionally a style acceptable only for casual trousers and work trousers; suit trousers and formal trousers were suspended by the use of braces (\"suspenders\" in American English) attached to buttons located on the interior or exterior of the waistband. Today, this remains the preferred method of trouser support amongst adherents of classical British tailoring. Many men claim this method is more effective and more comfortable because it requires no cinching of the waist or periodic adjustment.\n\nIn modern Western society, males customarily wear trousers and not skirts or dresses. There are exceptions, however, such as the ceremonial Scottish kilt and Greek fustanella, as well as robes or robe-like clothing such as the cassocks of clergy and the academic robes, both rarely worn today in daily use. (See also Men's skirts.)\n\nBased on Deuteronomy 22:5 in the Bible (\"The woman shall not wear that which pertaineth unto a man\"), some groups, including the Amish, Hutterites, some Mennonites, some Baptists, a few Church of Christ groups, and most Orthodox Jews, believe that women should not wear trousers, but only skirts and dresses. These groups do permit women to wear underpants as long as they are hidden. By contrast, many Muslim sects approve of pants as they are considered more modest than any skirt that is shorter than ankle length. However, some mosques require ankle length trousers for both Muslims and non-Muslims on the premises.\n\nAmong certain groups, low-rise, baggy trousers exposing underwear became fashionable; for example, among skaters and in 1990s hip hop fashion. This fashion is called sagging or, alternatively, \"busting slack.\"\n\n\"Cut-offs\" are homemade shorts made by cutting the legs off trousers, usually after holes have been worn in fabric around the knees. This extends the useful life of the trousers. The remaining leg fabric may be hemmed or left to fray after being cut.\n\nIn 2013, a law requiring women in Paris, France to ask permission from city authorities before \"dressing as men\", including wearing trousers (with exceptions for those \"holding a bicycle handlebar or the reins of a horse\") was declared officially revoked by France's Women's Rights Minister, Najat Vallaud-Belkacem.\n\nIn 2014, an Indian family court in Mumbai ruled that a husband objecting to his wife wearing a kurta and jeans and forcing her to wear a sari amounts to cruelty inflicted by the husband and can be a ground to seek divorce. The wife was thus granted a divorce on the ground of cruelty as defined under section 27(1)(d) of Special Marriage Act, 1954.\n\nIn Rome in 1992, a 45-year-old driving instructor was accused of rape. When he picked up an 18-year-old girl for her first driving lesson, he allegedly raped her for an hour, then told her that if she was to tell anyone he would kill her. Later that night she told her parents and her parents agreed to help her press charges. While the alleged rapist was convicted and sentenced, the Italian Supreme Court overturned the conviction in 1998 because the victim wore tight jeans. It was argued that she must have necessarily have had to help her attacker remove her jeans, thus making the act consensual (\"because the victim wore very, very tight jeans, she had to help him remove them...and by removing the jeans...it was no longer rape but consensual sex\"). The Italian Supreme Court stated in its decision “it is a fact of common experience that it is nearly impossible to slip off tight jeans even partly without the active collaboration of the person who is wearing them.” This ruling sparked widespread feminist protest. The day after the decision, women in the Italian Parliament protested by wearing jeans and holding placards that read “Jeans: An Alibi for Rape.” As a sign of support, the California Senate and Assembly followed suit. Soon Patricia Giggans, Executive Director of the Los Angeles Commission on Assaults Against Women, (now Peace Over Violence) made Denim Day an annual event. As of 2011 at least 20 U.S. states officially recognize Denim Day in April. Wearing jeans on this day, 22 April, has become an international symbol of protest. As of 2008 the Italian Supreme Court has overturned their findings, and there is no longer a \"denim\" defense to the charge of rape.\n\nIn Malawi women were not legally allowed to wear trousers under President Kamuzu Banda's rule until 1994. This law was introduced in 1965.\n\nIn 1919, Luisa Capetillo challenged mainstream society by becoming the first woman in Puerto Rico to wear trousers in public. Capetillo was sent to jail for what was then considered to be a crime, but, the judge later dropped the charges against her.\n\nIn 2013, Turkey's parliament ended a ban on women lawmakers wearing trousers in its assembly.\n\nIn Sudan, Article 152 of the Memorandum to the 1991 Penal Code prohibits the wearing of \"obscene outfits\" in public. This law has been used to arrest and prosecute women wearing trousers. Thirteen women including journalist Lubna al-Hussein were arrested in Khartoum in July 2009 for wearing trousers; ten of the women pleaded guilty and were flogged with ten lashes and fined 250 Sudanese pounds apiece. Lubna al-Hussein considers herself a good Muslim and asserts \"Islam does not say whether a woman can wear trousers or not. I'm not afraid of being flogged. It doesn't hurt. But it is insulting.\" She was eventually found guilty and fined the equivalent of $200 rather than being flogged.\n\nIn May 2004, in Louisiana, Democrat and state legislator Derrick Shepherd proposed a bill that would make it a crime to appear in public wearing trousers below the waist and thereby exposing one's skin or \"intimate clothing\".\nThe Louisiana bill did not pass.\n\nIn February 2005, Virginia legislators tried to pass a similar law that would have made punishable by a $50 fine \"any person who, while in a public place, intentionally wears and displays his below-waist undergarments, intended to cover a person's intimate parts, in a lewd or indecent manner\". (It is not clear whether, with the same coverage by the trousers, exposing underwear was considered worse than exposing bare skin, or whether the latter was already covered by another law.) The law passed in the Virginia House of Delegates. However, various criticisms to it arose. For example, newspaper columnists and radio talk show hosts consistently said that since most people that would be penalised under the law would be young African-American men, the law would thus be a form of racial discrimination. Virginia's state senators voted against passing the law.\n\nIn California, Government Code Section 12947.5 (part of the California Fair Employment and Housing Act (FEHA)) expressly protects the right to wear pants. Thus, the standard California FEHA discrimination complaint form includes an option for \"denied the right to wear pants.\"\n\n\n"}
{"id": "19185167", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19185167", "title": "Frankfurter Rippchen", "text": "Frankfurter Rippchen\n\n(Frankfurter) \"Rippchen mit Kraut\" (hot cured cutlet with sauerkraut) is a traditional dish served in and around Frankfurt am Main, Germany. It consists of cured pork cutlets, slowly heated in sauerkraut or meat broth, and usually served with sauerkraut, mashed potatoes and yellow mustard. Apfelwein (German cider) is normally consumed alongside Rippchen. The Rippchen are similar in appearance and texture to Kassler, but slightly milder in flavour, since they are only cured, but not smoked. \n\n"}
{"id": "19187802", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19187802", "title": "Dak-galbi", "text": "Dak-galbi\n\nDak-galbi (), or spicy stir-fried chicken, is a popular Korean dish made by stir-frying marinated diced chicken in a \"gochujang\"-based sauce with sweet potatoes, cabbage, perilla leaves, scallions, \"tteok\" (rice cake), and other ingredients. Many \"dak-galbi\" restaurants have round hot plates that are built into the tables. Lettuce and perilla leaves are served as \"ssam\" (wrap) vegetables.\n\nAlthough \"dak\" and \"galbi\" translate into \"chicken\" and \"rib\" respectively, the term \"dak-galbi\" does not refer to chicken ribs.\n\nThis dish was developed in the 1960s as grilled chicken-pieces, an inexpensive \"anju\" accompaniment to alcoholic drinks in small taverns on the outskirts of Chuncheon. It replaced the comparatively expensive \"gui\" dishes which were grilled over charcoal. \"Dak-galbi\" spread to Chuncheon's main districts, where the livestock industry was thriving and offered fresh ingredients with no need for refrigeration. As a relatively cheap dish served in large portions, it gained popularity with soldiers and students on a budget and earned the nickname \"commoners' \"galbi\" \" or \"university student's \"galbi\" \" in the 1970s.\n\nThe dish is a local specialty of Chuncheon, and is often referred to as Chuncheon-\"dak-galbi\". An annual festival dedicated to \"dak-galbi\" is held in Chuncheon, where there is also a \"dak-galbi\" alley with a large number of \"dak-galbi\" restaurants.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "19189948", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19189948", "title": "Spill pallet", "text": "Spill pallet\n\nA spill pallet is a bunded secondary containment item that is designed to hold containers of oil and fuels, typically in either a drum or in an intermediate bulk container. It is called a 'secondary containment item' because it is designed to catch the leaks and spill of the container's contents which rest upon it.\n\nThe spill pallets can come in a variety of sizes to accommodate multiple containers.\n\nIn the UK, a container of oil or fuel cannot be stored outside unless it is bundled in a secondary containment item (Oil Storage Regulations 2001). This means that if the container of oil leaks, it will be contained within the bund. The secondary containment item must be able to hold 110% of the largest container above.\n\nIf a person were to store 4 x 205-litre drums on the sump pallet, the sump pallet must be able to hold of oil.\n\nAlthough there are no laws in the UK stating that a sump pallet must hold 110% of the largest container upon it, it is still considered good practice to do so.\n\nSump pallets can be made in a variety of materials, but due to the nature of the oils or chemicals which will be stored upon it, they are typically made from either UV stabilised polyethylene, or steel that is galvanised for further protection from harsher chemicals. Also available in stainless and mild steels.\n"}
{"id": "19199143", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19199143", "title": "Coset leader", "text": "Coset leader\n\nIn coding theory, a coset leader is a word of minimum weight in any particular coset - that is, a word with the lowest amount of non-zero entries. Sometimes there are several words of equal minimum weight in a coset, and in that case, any one of those words may be chosen to be the coset leader.\n\nCoset leaders are used in the construction of a standard array for a linear code, which can then be used to decode received vectors. For a received vector \"y\", the decoded message is \"y - e\", where \"e\" is the coset leader of \"y\". Coset leaders can also be used to construct a fast decoding strategy. For each coset leader \"u\" we calculate the syndrome \"uH′\". When we receive \"v\" we evaluate \"vH′\" and find the matching syndrome. The corresponding coset leader is the most likely error pattern and we assume that \"v\"+\"u\" was the codeword sent.\n"}
{"id": "19208925", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19208925", "title": "Baingan bharta", "text": "Baingan bharta\n\nBaingan bharta (mashed eggplant) is a dish from the Indian subcontinent that originated in the Punjab region. 'Baingan ka bharta' is a part of the national cuisines of all nation states of the Indian subcontinent. It is a vegetarian dish that is prepared by mincing eggplant (\"baingan\") that is grilled over charcoal or direct fire. This infuses the dish with a smoky flavour. The smoked and mashed eggplant is then mixed with cooked chopped tomato, browned onion, ginger, garlic, cumin, fresh cilantro (coriander leaves), chili pepper, and mustard oil or a neutral vegetable oil. Traditionally, the dish is often eaten with flatbread (specifically roti or paratha) and is also served with rice or raita, a yogurt salad. In states such as Bihar and Uttar Pradesh, it is served hot with \"litti\".\n\nIn Pakistan and Bangladesh, \"baingan bharta\" is part of popular cuisine, while in India, it is part of the cuisines of many states, including Karnataka, Bihar, Maharashtra, Punjab, and West Bengal.\n\nThe dish has several regional names, such as: \"baingan ka bhurtha\" (, ), \"baingan da bhurtha\" (Punjabi), \"pura begena chatoni\" (), \"wangyacha bharit\" (), \"ennegayi\" (), \"begun bhôrta\" (), and \"olo\" (Gujarati).\n\nSome non-Punjabi variants may omit the tomato and sometimes the onion as well.\n\nIn Karnataka, it is called \"eṇṇegāyi\" and prepared by boiling and frying whole eggplant usually served with \"akki rotti\". In the South Indian state of Tamil Nadu, the Tamils prepare a similar dish called \"kathrikai thayir kothsu\", in which the eggplant is cooked, mashed, and sautéed with mustard, red chilis and sesame oil. The final step in the recipe involves adding yogurt (curds) to the mixture and dressing the dish with coriander leaves.\n\nIn the Bhojpuri-speaking regions of India (such as eastern Uttar Pradesh and western Bihar), it is known as \"baigan ka chokha\"; it is also popular within the Indo-Caribbean communities of Trinidad, Suriname, and Guyana, where many descendants of indentured labourers from northern India live.\n\nIn Maharashtra, especially in the northern Khandesh region, \"vangyache bharit\" as they call it is served in social gatherings including wedding ceremonies. During harvest season, a special \"\"bharit\" party\" is organised. \"Bharit\" is usually served with \"puri\". In the Vidarbha and Khandesh regions of Maharashtra, two variants are popular: \"kachha\" (raw)\" bharit\" and \"phodni cha\" (with \"tadka\") \"bharit\". In \"kachha bharit\", all the ingredients except for eggplant are used uncooked. Raw spring onion, tomato, green chillies, green coriander, and sometimes fresh fenugreek leaves are mixed with flame-roasted eggplant along with raw linseed oil or peanut oil. In \"phodni cha bharit\", the above ingredients are first fried in oil with spices; then, mashed eggplants are mixed into it and cooked together. The similar process is followed in other Indian states and Pakistan with slight variations on ingredients. In Vidarbha and Khandesh, it is considered a delicacy when the eggplants are roasted on a dried cotton plant stems, a process which gives a distinct smokey flavour to the dish. The dish is served with \"dal, bhakri\", and rice.\n\nEggplant is popular in Afghanistan in the form of a traditional salad called \"\"bonjan\" salad\", which is usually served at room temperature (or cold) together with main dishes. The dish is served with a variety of breads and is similar to another Afghani dish called \"baingan ka raita\" ().\n\nThere are many variation of preparing eggplant.\n\nIn a protest against BT Brinjal and the introduction of genetically modified crops, volunteers from Greenpeace and Delhi's Le Méridien hotel cooked of organic \"brinjal bharta\" at Dilli Haat, New Delhi, on 6 September 2011. This set a world record for the largest amount of the dish produced in one occasion of preparation. A portion of the final dish was sent to the Indian Prime Minister, Manmohan Singh's residence, accompanied by a letter of protest containing an explanation.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "19224415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19224415", "title": "Jumhuriya", "text": "Jumhuriya\n\nJumhūriyyah (; ) is the word for \"republic\" in the Arabic language. Loanwords representing variations of the term also exist in other languages such as Turkish and Persian.\n\nStates known officially as \"Jumhūriyyah\":\n\n"}
{"id": "19249826", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19249826", "title": "Pato no tucupi", "text": "Pato no tucupi\n\nPato no tucupi (Duck in Tucupi sauce) is a traditional Brazilian dish found mostly in the area around the city of Belém in the state of Pará state. The dish consists of a boiled duck (pato in Portuguese) in tucupi.\n\nOne of the more typical restaurants where it can be found is the \"Círculo Militar\" in Belém, in a historical palace near the harbour of the city.\n\n"}
{"id": "19303954", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19303954", "title": "Northland Organic Foods Corporation", "text": "Northland Organic Foods Corporation\n\nNorthland Organic Foods Corporation (NOFC) was a global food and agricultural products company based in Saint Paul, Minnesota. Founded in 1991, Northland was in the organic foods industry, specializing in the development, production, and international distribution of certified organic and conventional non-GMO specialty food and feed-use seeds, whole soybeans, corn, wheat and other cereal grains. Northland also produces and markets identity-preserved value-added ingredients such as soy meal, grits, flours, oils, lecithins and whole soybean powder under the \"IP Pure\" label.\n\nNorthland Organic Foods is actively involved on a local, national and international level in community programs and ecological conferences whose goals are to promote organic and sustainable agriculture. The company also sponsors a website called \"Seed to Plate\", a non-profit informational online resource dedicated to providing a forum for the discussion of agricultural, environmental, and artistic issues with the goal toward solutions and action.\n\nNorthland Organic Foods is the sister company of Northland Seed & Grain Corporation, based in Saint Paul, Minnesota, a producer and global supplier of identity preserved, non-GMO seeds, raw materials and ingredients to the food manufacturing and feed industries. Northland Seed & Grain’s seed breeding program is centered on the development of traditionally crossbred, organic and non-GMO specialty variety seeds and grains.\n\nThe company offers a low-fat soy product.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "19314447", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19314447", "title": "Goan Catholic cuisine", "text": "Goan Catholic cuisine\n\nGoan Catholic Cuisine is the cuisine of the Goan Catholic community and is largely influenced by the Saraswat, Konkani, Portuguese, South Indian, and British cuisines.\n\nGoan Catholics are Roman Catholics from the state of Goa, a region on the west coast of India. Most of the Goan Catholics are descended from Kshatriya and Vaishya natives of Goa, as well as Saraswat Brahmins. The rest of the locals of Goa who were converted to Christianity was during the Portuguese rule. The culture is a combination of Indian and Portuguese influences.\n\nGoan Catholic cuisine has distinct Portuguese influence as can be seen in the \"Roast Maas\", a famous pork roast crackling dish served as the \"Pièce de résistance\" at wedding dinners, the \"Pork Sorpotel\" with slight variations, and \"Cabidela\", a dish where fresh blood is stirred into the pork delicacy which ceases to exist in Goa although- is more prominent in \"Mangalore\" in Karnataka, than in Goa. The mainstay of the \"Ros\" dinner is \"Pork Bafad\". The curries use a lot of coconut, coconut oil and spices, along with vinegar. \"Xit Kodi\" (Xit – par-boiled or red rice; Kodi – fish curry) forms the staple food of the community. Other popular Portuguese influenced delicacies are \"Chouriço\" (pork sausage), \"Vindaloo\", \"Fish Rechad\", and \"Xacuti\". \nThe \"Chamuça\" is a Goan derivative of the samosa, which is usually filled with beef or pork, and is a well-known snack. Croquettes, beef cutlets, and beef potato chops are common snacks. Roast beef and beef tongue are popular entrees at Goan celebrations. The traditional, \"Mol de Peixe\" (fish pickle) and \"Balchão\" (prawn pickle sauce), are originally from Macau.\n\n\"Patoleo\" (sweet rice cakes steamed in turmeric leaves consisting of a filling of coconut and palm jaggery) are prepared on the Feasts of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary on 15 August , \"Saõ Joaõ\" (Nativity of Saint John the Baptist) on 24 June and \"Konsachem fest\" (harvest festival) which occurs across Goa during the month of August. \"Pez\" (a type of congee), \"Koiloris\" and \"Podecho\" (variants of dosa) are popular delicacies. The \"Sanna\" (a variant of idli) is another popular delicacy made from soaked rice, water, and salt.\nSweet dishes including \"Perad\" (guava cheese) and \"Kadio bodio\" (a tiny stick made with maida flour dipped in sugar syrup and dried) are well-known. \"Cashew laddus\", \"Khaje\", \"Revdyo\", \"Peda\", \"Tizan\", \"Godshem\", \"Puran Poli\", and \"Sakhar Bhat\" are other well-known sweet dishes. \"Filoz\" (a jaggery and banana pancake) and \"Arroz doce\" (a Portuguese derivative of kheer (sweetened rice) from India) are also popular.\n\nFeni: cashew feni is made from the fermentation of the fruit of the cashew tree, while coconut feni is made from the sap of toddy palms, which is a popular alcoholic beverage.\n\n\"Kuswar\" is a term often used to refer to a set of unique Christmas goods that are a part of the cuisine of the Goan Catholic community. There are as many as 22 different traditional recipes that form this distinct flavour of Christmas celebration in Goa. \"Neuries\" are mince puffs stuffed with plums, nuts, fried theel, and sugar. \"Kidyo\" or \"Kulkul\" is a curly concoction dipped in sugar treacle. \"Bolinhas\" are small cakes, which are also known as \"coconut cookies\". \"Perad\" is a type of savoury guava cheese. \"Nankatais\", which resemble \"snow balls\", are made from a batter of sugar, butter and flour. \"Baath\" is a moist rich coconut tart baked in a large round shape with pastry lattice work on top. \"Marzipan\" is a confection consisting primarily of sugar and cashew or almond meal. \"Doce\" is a sweet made using chickpeas and coconut.\n\n\"Bebinca\", a rich egg-based multi-layered sweet dish, is what Goa is famous for and the subtle flavoured rose cookies are a hot favourite, but it is the Rich Plum Cake, which takes the better part of a week to make, that is the most famous. Candied fruit, plums, currants, and raisins are dexterously cut and soaked in rum. Flour is sieved and gently warmed in the sun. Nuts are peeled and chopped and the whole family comes together to make the cake. Jobs are allotted, one to whip up the eggs, while another creams the butter and sugar, cake tins are lined, and a strong pair of arms requisitioned to do the final mixing and stirring.\n\n\n \"Ros\" is a ceremony celebrating the last day of the virginity of a bride and bridegroom. The bride is massaged with coconut milk.\n\n"}
{"id": "19316173", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19316173", "title": "Dering Roll", "text": "Dering Roll\n\nThe Dering Roll is the oldest English roll of arms surviving in its original form. It was made between 1270 and 1280 and contains the coat of arms of 324 knights, starting with two illegitimate children of King John. Sir Edward Dering acquired the roll during the 17th century and modified it to include a fictitious ancestor of his own. It was eventually purchased by the British Library (as Add Roll 77720) following fund raising involving a number of other charities and individuals.\n\nGlover's Roll, made in 1586, is a copy of a now lost roll dating from even earlier, from the reign of King Henry III (1216–1272).\n\nThe Dering Roll depicts the coats of arms of around a quarter of the English baronage during the era of Edward I. Emphasis was given to knights from Sussex and Kent, as it was produced in Dover between 1270 and 1280 and the document was designed to list the knights who owed feudal service there. It depicts 324 coats of arms, beginning with Richard Fitz Roy and William de Say, two of King John's illegitimate sons. The shields are arranged in 54 rows, with six shields on each line. Above each shield reads the knight's name, except in six cases where it has been omitted or removed. Stephen de Pencester may have commissioned the roll during his time as Constable of Dover Castle.\n\nSir Edward Dering acquired the Roll whilst lieutenant of Dover Castle, and made his modification after 1638, removing the coat of arms of Nicholas de Crioll and inserting his own coat of arms with a fictitious ancestor named Ric[hard] fi[t]z Dering in order to prove the history of his own family. This appears adjacent to the shield for Thomas de Marines (\"or a cross engrailed gules\"). \n\nThe trail of Richard fitz Dering (built upon sources dependent upon Dering's collections) leads, or was intended to lead, to the manor of Heyton in Stanford, Kent (where the connection with the family of Marinis was mentioned by Edward Hasted), and exemplified by charters like that in Thomas Willement's hands. A descent through a branch of the de Haute family of Wadenhall, Waltham, Kent was then indicated, but Sir Edward Dering's constructive approach to genealogy leaves many of the sources bedevilled by doubts of authenticity.\n\nDuring the 20th century it was acquired by Sir Anthony Wagner. On 4 December 2007, the roll was sold at auction at Sotheby's for the sum of £192,000 to a private individual who subsequently applied for an export licence. The Department for Culture, Media and Sport placed a temporary block on the roll being moved overseas and the British Library led efforts to purchase it, after the Reviewing Committee on the Export of Works of Art confirmed it to be of sufficient importance and significance. The library raised £194,184 to acquire the roll; the Head of Medieval and Earlier Manuscripts, Claire Breay said of the purchase, \"the acquisition of the Dering Roll provides an extremely rare chance to add a manuscript of enormous local and national significance.\" They were assisted in funding the purchase from The Art Fund (£40,000), the National Heritage Memorial Fund (£100,000), Friends of the British Library (£10,000), Friends of the National Libraries (£10,000), and a number of individual benefactors. It is now on display at the Sir John Ritblat Gallery in the British Library, and available to researchers in the library's manuscripts reading room.\n\n"}
{"id": "19317870", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19317870", "title": "Sally Lunn bun", "text": "Sally Lunn bun\n\nA Sally Lunn is a large bun or teacake made with a yeast dough including cream and eggs, similar to the sweet brioche breads of France. Served warm and sliced, with butter, it was first recorded in 1780 in the spa town of Bath in southwest England. The same name has been applied to various unrelated breads in the United States since the early 20th century.\n\nThe origins of the Sally Lunn are shrouded in myth - one theory is that it is an anglicisation of \"\"Soleil et lune\"\" (French for \"sun and moon\"), representing the golden crust and white base/interior. The Sally Lunn Eating House in Bath, England, claims that the recipe was brought to Bath in the 1680s by a Huguenot refugee called Solange Luyon, who became known as Sally Lunn, but there is no evidence to support this theory.\n\nThere is a passing mention of \"Sally Lunn and saffron cake\" in a 1776 poem about Dublin by the Irish poet William Preston. The first recorded mention of the bun in Somerset is as part of a detox regime in Philip Thicknesse's 1780 guidebook to taking the waters at Bath. Thicknesse describes how he would daily see visitors drinking 2-3 pints of Bath water and then \"sit down to a meal of Sally Lunns or hot spungy rolls, made high by burnt butter!\" He recommends against the practice as his brother died after this kind of breakfast - \"Such a meal, few young men in full health can get over without feeling much inconvenience\".\n\nThere is little historical evidence for Sally Lunn as a person. The Gentleman's Magazine of 1798 uses Sally Lunn as an example during a discussion of foods named after people - 'a certain sort of hot rolls, now, or not long ago, in vogue at Bath, were gratefully and emphatically styled \"Sally Lunns\"'. But it is not until 1827 that a historical person is described by a correspondent of William Hone using the pseudonym \"Jehoiada\", who says she had sold the buns on the street \"about thirty years ago\". A baker called Dalmer had bought out her business and made it highly successful after he composed a special song for the vendors, who sold the buns from mobile ovens. The earliest evidence of commercial production is an 1819 advert for the Sally Lunn \"cakes\" sold by W. Needes of Bath, bread and biscuit maker to the Prince Regent.\n\nSally Lunns were mentioned together with muffins and crumpets by Charles Dickens in 1844 in his novel \"The Chimes\". A year later, in 1845, Eliza Acton gave a recipe in \"Modern Cookery for Private Families\", describing it as a version of \"Solimemne - A rich French breakfast cake, or Sally Lunn\". \"Solilemmes\" is a kind of brioche that is served warm and popularised by the great Parisian chef Marie-Antoine Carême in a book of 1815. Carême claimed the \"\"solilem\"\" originated in Alsace but there is no evidence to support that claim; he may have taken the idea from contacts in Bath and then tried to disguise the origins of a recipe that came from France's great enemy.\n\nThe medieval building now known as the Sally Lunn Eating House is at 4 North Parade Passage (formerly Lilliput Alley) in Bath The site was originally occupied by the south range of Bath Abbey and the lowest floor level dates to the reconstruction of the abbey after a great fire in 1137. The masonry oven in the basement dates from this time. After the Reformation it came into the hands of the Colthurst family of Wardour Castle who sold it to John Hall of Bradford on Avon in 1612. In 1622 Hall leased the site to George Parker, a carpenter who built the current house. The Hall estate was later acquired by the 2nd Duke of Kingston, who sold the house to William Robinson in 1743. There may have been baking on a small scale during the 1700s but it only became the main commercial use of the building around the turn of the century.\n\nThe building was acquired in the 1930s by Marie Byng-Johnson who opened it as a tea-room specializing in Sally Lunn buns, promoted with a story that she had discovered an ancient document in a secret panel above the fireplace explaining that Mlle. Sally Lunn was a young French Huguenot refugee who brought the recipe to Bath around 1680. The building is now Grade II* listed.\n\nSally Lunns are mentioned alongside muffins and crumpets by Charles Dickens in his novel \"The Chimes\", first published in 1844 and frequently reprinted.\n\nThe Sally Lunn was later mentioned in Gilbert & Sullivan's comic opera \"The Sorcerer\":\n\n"}
{"id": "19319774", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19319774", "title": "Songs of realization", "text": "Songs of realization\n\nSongs of realization, or Songs of Experience (; Devanāgarī: दोहा; Romanized Sanskrit: \"Dohā\"; Oriya: ପଦ), are sung poetry forms characteristic of the tantric movement in both Hinduism and in Vajrayana Buddhism. Doha is also a specific poetic form. Various forms of these songs exist, including caryagiti (), or 'performance songs' and vajragiti (Sanskrit: \"vajragīti\", Tibetan: \"rDo-rje gan-sung\" ), or 'diamond songs', sometimes translated as vajra songs and doha (Sanskrit: \"dohā\", दोह, 'that which results from milking the cow'), also called doha songs, distinguishing them from the unsung Indian poetry form of the doha. According to Roger Jackson, caryagiti and vajragiti \"differ generically from dohās because of their different context and function\"; the doha being primarily spiritual aphorisms expressed in the form of rhyming couplets whilst caryagiti are stand-alone performance songs and vajragiti are songs that can only be understood in the context of a ganachakra or tantric feast. Many collections of songs of realization are preserved in the Tibetan Buddhist canon, however many of these texts have yet to be translated from the Tibetan language.\n\nAlthough many of the songs of realization date from the mahasiddha of India, the tradition of composing mystical songs continued to be practiced by tantric adepts in later times and examples of spontaneously composed verses by Tibetan lamas exist up to the present day, an example being Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche. The most famous Tibetan composer of songs of realization is Milarepa, the 11th century Tibetan yogi whose \"mgur bum\", or 'The Hundred Thousand Songs of Milarepa' remains a source of instruction and inspiration for Tibetan Buddhists, particularly those of the kagyu school.\n\nA renowned collection of Buddhist caryagiti, or mystical songs, is the Charyapada, a palm-leaf manuscript of the 8th-12th century text having been found in the early 20th century in Nepal. Another copy of the Charyapada was preserved in the Tibetan Buddhist canon. Miranda Shaw describes how caryagiti were an element of the ritual gathering of practitioners in a tantric feast:The feast culminates in the performance of tantric dances and music that must never be disclosed to outsiders. The revelers may also improvise \"songs of realization\" (\"caryagiti\") to express their heightened clarity and blissful raptures in spontaneous verse. \nAnn Waldman describes this poetry form: the \"doha\", a song of realization that acknowledges an encounter with a master teacher, traditionally a guru or lama, and explores a particular wisdom or teaching transmitted through a kind of call-and-response duet format.\nRangjung Dorje (1284–1339) wrote a Doha song entitled \"Distinguishing Consciousness from Wisdom\" (Wylie: rnam shes ye shes ‘byed pa).\n\n\nCollections of songs of realization:\n\n"}
{"id": "19320362", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19320362", "title": "Schrecklichkeit", "text": "Schrecklichkeit\n\nSchrecklichkeit (German \"terror\" or \"frightfulness\") is a word used by English speakers to describe an assumed military policy of the German Army towards civilians in World War I.\n\nUnder the traditional \"laws of war\" in Europe, military activity was to be confined to the regular, uniformed armies of each side. Civilians were to take no part in fighting, neither attacking or being attacked. Thus, when the uniformed army troops in a nation or region were all defeated, resistance was supposed to end. In practice, informal resistance by \"partisans\", \"guerrillas\", or \"\"francs-tireurs\"\" often continued after the \"regular\" troops had given up or withdrawn. These fighters, never officially enrolled in an army, and not wearing uniforms to identify them as combatants, attacked occupying troops by ambushes, surprises, and sniping. Conducting such operations out of uniform was considered perfidy, and those involved could be executed.\n\nOccupying armies sometimes responded to such attacks by reprisals against the local population: execution of local inhabitants, whether known to be guerrillas or not, or destruction (usually by burning) of homes and other structures.\n\nGerman army doctrine in force at the time called for such reprisals to be performed immediately and severely in any case of civilian resistance. It was argued that such \"schrecklichkeit\" would end resistance quickly with relatively little bloodshed, whereas restraint would encourage resistance, leading to greater destruction and death.\n\nWhen Germany invaded Belgium in 1914, the German high command expected to sweep through the country with negligible opposition. The German army was many times larger and stronger than the Belgian army, and the Germans therefore thought that any resistance by Belgium would be futile. German leaders had even suggested to the Belgian government that in the event of war, the Belgians should just line up along the roads and watch the Germans march through. Belgium's refusal to accept these German presumptions and its resistance to the German advance came as a surprise, and disrupted the German timetable for advancing into France.\n\nThis frustration was communicated to the German troops in Belgium. Anything which delayed the German advance was to be crushed mercilessly. The Belgians were viewed as irrational and even treacherous for their opposition.\n\nThis led to exaggerated suspicions among German commanders of Belgian civilian resistance. It is possible that some Belgian civilians engaged in resistance, though none is documented. It is certain that on several occasions, German commanders declared (probably in unconscious error) that such acts had occurred when they had not.\n\nThe Germans responded to these perceived acts of resistance with harsh measures. In several villages and towns, hundreds of civilians were executed. Many buildings were put to the torch. Priests thought guilty of encouraging the resistance were killed. Violence by German soldiers against Belgians, such as rape, was ignored or not seriously punished. The Belgian city of Leuven was largely destroyed. One German officer later wrote about the town, \"We shall wipe it out...Not one stone will stand upon another. We will teach them to respect Germany. For generations people will come here and see what we have done.\"\n\nThese actions, taken in a period of near-panic as the German forces desperately tried to carry out their flanking march before Allied forces could respond, proved to be a propaganda disaster for Germany. The reports of them caused a wave of indignation which aided the Allied cause.\n\nThe German argument for many years was that the actions in Belgium were the result of civilian resistance. The Belgian government was to blame for this \"illegal warfare\". Echoes of this can be found as late as the 1990s in such works as \"Deutsche Geschichte\" of Thomas Nipperdey and in the 1996 edition of the \"Brockhaus Enzyklopädie\". John Horne and Alan Kramer in \"German Atrocities 1914: A History of Denial\" contest this. Based on several sources, they contend that the German Army faced no irregular forces in Belgium and France during the first two and a half months of World War I, but believed it did due to erroneous reports of civilian resistance and as a result responded inappropriately and with excessive force.\n\n"}
{"id": "19320712", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19320712", "title": "Land tenure in England", "text": "Land tenure in England\n\nEven before the Norman Conquest, there was a strong tradition of landholding in Anglo-Saxon law. When William the Conqueror asserted sovereignty over England in 1066, he confiscated the property of the recalcitrant English landowners. Over the next dozen years, he granted land to his lords and to the dispossessed Englishmen, or affirmed their existing land holdings, in exchange for fealty and promises of military and other services. At the time of the Domesday Book, all land in England was held by someone, and from that time there has been no allodial land in England. In order to legitimise the notion of the Crown's paramount lordship, a legal fiction - that all land titles were held by the King's subjects as a result of a royal grant - was adopted.\n\nMost of these tenants-in-chief had considerable land holdings and proceeded to grant parts of their land to their subordinates. This constant process of granting new tenures was known as subinfeudation. It created a complicated pyramid of feudal relationships. (see also Lord of the manor). At the bottom of the feudal pyramid were the tenants who lived on and worked the land (called the tenants in demesne and also the tenant paravail). In the middle were the lords who had no direct relationship with the King, or with the land in question - referred to as mesne lords.\n\nLand was granted in return for various \"services\" and \"incidents\". A service was an obligation on the part of the tenant owed to the landlord. The most important were payment of rent (socage tenure), military service (Knight-service), the performance of some form of religious service (frankalmoin) and personal/official service, including in times of war (serjeanty tenure). \n\nIncidents, on the other hand, were rights conferred on the lord over the tenant's land or the tenant's person that arose in certain circumstances, most commonly on the death of the tenant. An important incident was that of escheat, whereby the land of the tenant by knight service would escheat to the Crown in the event either of there being no heirs, or the knight's being convicted of a felony.\n\nThe concept of land tenure has been described as a \"spatial fragmentation of proprietary interests in land\". No one person could claim absolute ownership of a parcel of land, except the Crown. Thus the modern concept of \"ownership\" is not helpful in explaining the complexity of the distribution of rights. In relation to a particular piece of land, a number of people had rights: first, the tenant in demesne with possessory rights; second the mesne lord to whom the tenant owed services; third, a tenant in chief to whom the mesne lord owed services; and finally the Crown who received services directly from the tenant in chief.\n\nThe feudal system in England gradually became more and more complex until eventually the process became cumbrous and services difficult to enforce. As a result, the statute of Quia Emptores was passed in 1290 to replace subinfeudation with substitution, so the subordinate tenant transferred their tenure rather than creating a new subordinate tenure. As tenancies came to an end, the number of layers in the feudal pyramid was reduced. The Tenures Abolition Act 1660 abolished knight service, converting all free tenures to socage tenure. \n\nQuia Emptores and its equivalents do not apply to leases and life estates. In essence, lease of land to a tenant is a form of subinfeudation (unless the lease is granted by the Crown).\n\nThe main two official surveys undertaken in the British Isles with the aim of identifying owners of land and land values are the Domesday Book of 1086 and the Return of Owners of Land, 1873.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "19345094", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19345094", "title": "Guinness", "text": "Guinness\n\nGuinness () is a dark Irish dry stout that originated in the brewery of Arthur Guinness at St. James's Gate, Dublin, Ireland, in 1759. It is one of the most successful beer brands worldwide, brewed in almost 50 countries, and available in over 120. Sales in 2011 amounted to . It is popular with the Irish, both in Ireland and abroad. In spite of declining consumption since 2001, it is still the best-selling alcoholic drink in Ireland. where Guinness & Co. Brewery makes almost €2 billion worth annually.\n\nGuinness' flavour derives from malted barley and roasted unmalted barley, a relatively modern development, not becoming part of the grist until the mid-20th century. For many years, a portion of aged brew was blended with freshly brewed beer to give a sharp lactic acid flavour. Although Guinness's palate still features a characteristic \"tang\", the company has refused to confirm whether this type of blending still occurs. The draught beer's thick, creamy head comes from mixing the beer with nitrogen and carbon dioxide.\n\nThe company moved its headquarters to London at the beginning of the Anglo-Irish Trade War in 1932. In 1997, Guinness Plc merged with Grand Metropolitan to form the multinational alcoholic-drinks producer Diageo plc, based out of London.\n\nArthur Guinness started brewing ales in 1759 at the St. James's Gate Brewery, Dublin. On 31 December 1759, he signed a 9,000 year lease at £45 per annum for the unused brewery. Ten years later, on 19 May 1769, Guinness first exported his ale: he shipped six-and-a-half barrels to Great Britain.\n\nArthur Guinness started selling the dark beer porter in 1778. The first Guinness beers to use the term were Single Stout and Double Stout in the 1840s. Throughout the bulk of its history, Guinness produced only three variations of a single beer type: porter or single stout, double or extra and foreign stout for export. \"Stout\" originally referred to a beer's strength, but eventually shifted meaning toward body and colour. Porter was also referred to as \"plain\", as mentioned in the famous refrain of Flann O'Brien's poem \"The Workman's Friend\": \"A pint of plain is your only man.\"\n\nAlready one of the top-three British and Irish brewers, Guinness's sales soared from 350,000 barrels in 1868 to 779,000 barrels in 1876. In October 1886 Guinness became a public company, and was averaging sales of 1,138,000 barrels a year. This was despite the brewery's refusal to either advertise or offer its beer at a discount. Even though Guinness owned no public houses, the company was valued at £6 million and shares were twenty times oversubscribed, with share prices rising to a 60 per cent premium on the first day of trading.\n\nThe breweries pioneered several quality control efforts. The brewery hired the statistician William Sealy Gosset in 1899, who achieved lasting fame under the pseudonym \"Student\" for techniques developed for Guinness, particularly Student's \"t\"-distribution and the even more commonly known Student's \"t\"-test.\n\nBy 1900 the brewery was operating unparalleled welfare schemes for its 5,000 employees. By 1907 the welfare schemes were costing the brewery £40,000 a year, which was one-fifth of the total wages bill. The improvements were suggested and supervised by Sir John Lumsden. By 1914, Guinness was producing 2,652,000 barrels of beer a year, which was more than double that of its nearest competitor Bass, and was supplying more than 10 per cent of the total UK beer market. In the 1930s, Guinness became the seventh largest company in the world.\n\nBefore 1939, if a Guinness brewer wished to marry a Catholic, his resignation was requested. According to Thomas Molloy, writing in the \"Irish Independent\", \"It had no qualms about selling drink to Catholics but it did everything it could to avoid employing them until the 1960s.\"\n\nGuinness thought they brewed their last porter in 1973. In the 1970s, following declining sales, the decision was taken to make Guinness Extra Stout more \"drinkable\". The gravity was subsequently reduced, and the brand was relaunched in 1981. Pale malt was used for the first time, and isomerized hop extract began to be used. In 2014, two new porters were introduced: West Indies Porter and Dublin Porter.\n\nGuinness acquired the Distillers Company in 1986. This led to a scandal and criminal trial concerning the artificial inflation of the Guinness share price during the takeover bid engineered by the chairman, Ernest Saunders. A subsequent £5.2 million success fee paid to an American lawyer and Guinness director, Tom Ward, was the subject of the case \"Guinness plc v Saunders\", in which the House of Lords declared that the payment had been invalid.\n\nIn the 1980s, as the IRA's bombing campaign spread to London and the rest of Britain, Guinness considered scrapping the harp as its logo.\n\nThe company merged with Grand Metropolitan in 1997 to form Diageo. Due to controversy over the merger, the company was maintained as a separate entity within Diageo and has retained the rights to the product and all associated trademarks of Guinness.\n\nThe Guinness brewery in Park Royal, London closed in 2005. The production of all Guinness sold in the UK and Ireland was moved to St. James's Gate Brewery, Dublin.\n\nGuinness has also been referred to as \"that black stuff\". Guinness had a fleet of ships, barges and yachts. The Irish \"Sunday Independent\" newspaper reported on 17 June 2007 that Diageo intended to close the historic St James's Gate plant in Dublin and move to a greenfield site on the outskirts of the city. This news caused some controversy when it was announced.\n\nThe following day, the \"Irish Daily Mail\" ran a follow-up story with a double page spread complete with images and a history of the plant since 1759. Initially, Diageo said that talk of a move was pure speculation but in the face of mounting speculation in the wake of the \"Sunday Independent\" article, the company confirmed that it is undertaking a \"significant review of its operations\". This review was largely due to the efforts of the company's ongoing drive to reduce the environmental impact of brewing at the St James's Gate plant.\n\nOn 23 November 2007, an article appeared in the \"Evening Herald\", a Dublin newspaper, stating that the Dublin City Council, in the best interests of the city of Dublin, had put forward a motion to prevent planning permission ever being granted for development of the site, thus making it very difficult for Diageo to sell off the site for residential development.\n\nOn 9 May 2008, Diageo announced that the St James's Gate brewery will remain open and undergo renovations, but that breweries in Kilkenny and Dundalk will be closed by 2013 when a new larger brewery is opened near Dublin. The result will be a loss of roughly 250 jobs across the entire Diageo/Guinness workforce in Ireland. Two days later, the \"Sunday Independent\" again reported that Diageo chiefs had met with Tánaiste Mary Coughlan, the deputy leader of the Government of Ireland, about moving operations to Ireland from the UK to benefit from its lower corporation tax rates. Several UK firms have made the move in order to pay Ireland's 12.5 per cent rate rather than the UK's 28 per cent rate. Diageo released a statement to the London stock exchange denying the report. Despite the merger that created Diageo plc in 1997, Guinness has retained its right to the Guinness brand and associated trademarks and thus continues to trade under the traditional Guinness name despite trading under the corporation name Diageo for a brief period in 1997.\n\nIn November 2015 it was announced that Guinness are planning to make their beer suitable for consumption by vegetarians and vegans by the end of 2016 through the introduction of a new filtration process at their existing Guinness Brewery that avoids the need to use isinglass from fish bladders to filter out yeast particles. This went into effect in 2017, per the company's FAQ webpage where they state: \"Our new filtration process has removed the use of isinglass as a means of filtration and vegans can now enjoy a pint of Guinness. All Guinness Draught in keg format is brewed without using isinglass. Full distribution of bottle and can formats will be in place by the end of 2017, so until then, our advice to vegans is to consume the product from the keg format only for now.\" \nGuinness stout is made from water, barley, roast malt extract, hops, and brewer's yeast. A portion of the barley is roasted to give Guinness its dark colour and characteristic taste. It is pasteurised and filtered. Despite its reputation as a \"meal in a glass\", Guinness only contains 198 kcal (838 kilojoules) per imperial pint (1460 kJ/l), slightly less than skimmed milk, orange juice, and most other non-light beers.\n\nUntil the late 1950s Guinness was still racked into wooden casks. In the late 1950s and early 1960s, Guinness ceased brewing cask-conditioned beers and developed a keg brewing system with aluminium kegs replacing the wooden casks; these were nicknamed \"iron lungs\".\nUntil 2016 the production of Guinness, as with many beers, involved the use of isinglass made from fish. Isinglass was used as a fining agent for settling out suspended matter in the vat. The isinglass was retained in the floor of the vat but it was possible that minute quantities might be carried over into the beer.. Diageo announced in February 2018 that the use of isinglass\nin draught Guinness was to be discontinued and an alternative clarification agent would be used instead. This has made draught Guinness acceptable to vegans and vegetarians.\n\nArguably its biggest change to date, in 1959 Guinness began using nitrogen, which changed the fundamental texture and flavour of the Guinness of the past as nitrogen bubbles are much smaller than CO, giving a \"creamier\" and \"smoother\" consistency over a sharper and traditional CO taste. This step was taken after Michael Ash – a mathematician turned brewer – discovered the mechanism to make this possible.\n\nNitrogen is less soluble than carbon dioxide, which allows the beer to be put under high pressure without making it fizzy. High pressure of the dissolved gas is required to enable very small bubbles to be formed by forcing the draught beer through fine holes in a plate in the tap, which causes the characteristic \"surge\" (the widget in cans and bottles achieves the same effect). This \"widget\" is a small plastic ball containing the nitrogen. The perceived smoothness of draught Guinness is due to its low level of carbon dioxide and the creaminess of the head caused by the very fine bubbles that arise from the use of nitrogen and the dispensing method described above. \"Foreign Extra Stout\" contains more carbon dioxide, causing a more acidic taste.\n\nContemporary Guinness Draught and Extra Stout are weaker than they were in the 19th century, when they had an original gravity of over 1.070. Foreign Extra Stout and Special Export Stout, with abv of 7.5% and 9% respectively, are perhaps closest to the original in character.\n\nAlthough Guinness may appear to be black, it is officially a very dark shade of ruby.\n\nThe most recent change in alcohol content from the Import Stout to the Extra Stout was due to a change in distribution through North American market. Consumer complaints have influenced recent distribution and bottle changes.\nStudies claim that Guinness can be beneficial to the heart. Researchers found that \"'antioxidant compounds' in the Guinness, similar to those found in certain fruits and vegetables, are responsible for the health benefits because they slow down the deposit of harmful cholesterol on the artery walls.\"\n\nGuinness ran an advertising campaign in the 1920s which stemmed from market research – when people told the company that they felt good after their pint, the slogan, created by Dorothy L. Sayers–\"Guinness is Good for You\". Advertising for alcoholic drinks that implies improved physical performance or enhanced personal qualities is now prohibited in Ireland. Diageo, the company that now manufactures Guinness, says: \"We never make any medical claims for our drinks.\"\n\nGuinness stout is available in a number of variants and strengths, which include:\n\nIn October 2005, Guinness announced the Brewhouse Series, a limited-edition collection of draught stouts available for roughly six months each. There were three beers in the series.\n\nDespite an announcement in June 2007 that the fourth Brewhouse stout would be launched in October that year, no new beer appeared and, at the end of 2007, the Brewhouse series appeared to have been quietly cancelled.\n\nIn March 2006, Guinness introduced the \"surger\" in Britain. The surger is a plate-like electrical device meant for the home. It sends ultrasonic waves through a Guinness-filled pint glass to recreate the beer's \"surge and settle\" effect. The device works in conjunction with special cans of surger-ready Guinness. Guinness tried out a primitive version of this system in 1977 in New York. The idea was abandoned until 2003, when it began testing the surger in Japanese bars, most of which are too small to accommodate traditional keg-and-tap systems. Since then, the surger has been introduced to bars in Paris. Surgers are also in use in Australia, Singapore and Greece. The surger for the US market was announced on 14 November 2007; plans were to make the unit available to bars only.\n\nWithdrawn Guinness variants include Guinness's Brite Lager, Guinness's Brite Ale, Guinness Light, Guinness XXX Extra Strong Stout, Guinness Cream Stout, Guinness Gold, Guinness Pilsner, Guinness Breó (a slightly citrusy wheat beer), Guinness Shandy, and Guinness Special Light.\n\nBreó (meaning 'glow' in \nIrish) was a wheat beer; it cost around IR£5 million to develop.\n\nFor a short time in the late 1990s, Guinness produced the \"St James's Gate\" range of craft-style beers, available in a small number of Dublin pubs. The beers were: Pilsner Gold, Wicked Red Ale, Wildcat Wheat Beer and Dark Angel Lager.\n\nA brewing byproduct of Guinness, Guinness Yeast Extract (GYE), was produced until the 1950s. In the UK, a HP Guinness Sauce has recently been made available, manufactured by Heinz. Kraft also licenses the name for its Barbecue sauce product, Bull's-Eye Barbecue Sauce.\n\nIn March 2010, Guinness began test marketing Guinness Black Lager, a new black lager, in Northern Ireland and Malaysia. As of September 2010, Guinness Black Lager is no longer readily available in Malaysia. In October 2010, Guinness began selling Foreign Extra Stout in 4 packs of bottles in the United States.\n\n\"Guinness Red Harvest Stout\" was introduced in September 2013. sold in 14.9oz widget cans: 4.1% alcohol by volume (ABV); Inspired by the ancient Celtic festival of samhain, the seasonal Guinness Red Harvest Stout has a mildly sweet velvety taste and deep red hue. Crafted with a blend of lightly roasted barley and sweet Irish malt.\n\nIn 2014, Guinness released \"Guinness Blonde\", a lager brewed in Latrobe, Pennsylvania using a combination of Guinness yeast and American ingredients. The Guinness Brewers Project also released two craft beers, \"Dublin Porter\" and \"West Indies Porter\".\n\nGuinness released a lager in 2015 called Hop House 13. It has become an available drink in many Irish pubs. Hop House 13 is intended to have hints of apricot and peach, with malt flavor and a medium body.\n\nBefore the 1960s, when Guinness adopted the current system of delivery using a nitrogen/carbon dioxide gas mixture, all beer leaving the brewery was cask-conditioned. Casks newly delivered to many small pubs were often nearly unmanageably frothy, but cellar space and rapid turnover demanded that they be put into use before they could sit for long enough to settle down. As a result, a glass would be part filled with the fresh, frothy beer, allowed to stand a minute, and then topped up with beer from a cask that had been pouring longer and had calmed down a bit. With the move to nitrogen gas dispense in the 1960s, it was felt important to keep the two-stage pour ritual in order to bring better consumer acceptance of the modern nitrogen-based delivery. As Guinness has not been cask-conditioned for decades, the two-stage pour has been labeled a marketing ploy that does not actually affect the beer's taste.\n\nWhat Diageo calls the \"perfect pint\" of Draught Guinness is the product of a \"double pour\", which according to the company should take 119.53 seconds. Guinness has promoted this wait with advertising campaigns such as \"good things come to those who wait\". Despite this, Guinness has endorsed the use of \"Exactap\", marketed by DigitalDispense USA LLC, owned in a trust by its American inventor. The \"Exactap\" is the fastest beer dispense system in the world and can deliver a perfectly presented Guinness, with no overfilling, in just 4 seconds. There are over 600 \"Exactaps\" in use in Dublin stadia alone.\n\nThe brewer currently recommends that draught Guinness should be served at 6 °C (42.8 °F), while Extra Cold Guinness should be served at 3.5 °C (38.6 °F). Prior to the 21st century it was popular to serve Guinness at cellar temperature (about 13 C) and some drinkers preferred it at room temperature (about 20 C).\n\nAccording to Esquire Magazine, a pint of Guinness should be served in a slightly tulip shaped pint glass (as opposed to the taller European tulip glass or 'Nonic' glass, which contains a ridge approx 3/4 of the way up the glass). To begin the pour, the server holds the glass at a 45° angle below the tap and fills the glass 3/4 full. On the way out of the tap, the beer is forced at high speed through a five-hole disc restrictor plate in the end of the tap, creating friction and forcing the creation of small nitrogen bubbles which form a creamy head. After allowing the initial pour to settle, the server fills the remainder of the glass until the head forms a slight dome over the top of the glass.\n\nIn April 2010, Guinness redesigned the Guinness pint glass for the first time in a decade. The new glass is taller and narrower than the previous one and features a bevel design. The new glasses are planned to gradually replace the old ones.\n\nWhen Guinness is poured, the gas bubbles appear to travel downwards in the glass. The effect is attributed to drag; bubbles that touch the walls of a glass are slowed in their travel upwards. Bubbles in the centre of the glass are, however, free to rise to the surface, and thus form a rising column of bubbles. The rising bubbles create a current by the entrainment of the surrounding fluid. As beer rises in the centre, the beer near the outside of the glass falls. This downward flow pushes the bubbles near the glass towards the bottom. Although the effect occurs in any liquid, it is particularly noticeable in any dark nitrogen stout, as the drink combines dark-coloured liquid and light-coloured bubbles.\n\nA study published in 2012 revealed that the effect is due to the particular shape of the glass coupled with the small bubble size found in stout beers. If the vessel widens with height then bubbles will sink along the walls – this is the case for the standard pint glass. Conversely, in an anti-pint (i.e. if the vessel narrows with height) bubbles will rise along the walls.\n\nGuinness is frequently used as an ingredient in recipes, often to add a seemingly authentic Irish element to the menus of Irish-themed pubs in the United States, where it is stirred into everything from french toast to beef stew.\n\nA popular, authentic, Irish course featuring Guinness is the \"Guinness and Steak Pie\". The recipe includes many common Irish herbs, as well as beef brisket, cheeses, and a can of Guinness.\n\nThe Guinness harp motif is modelled on the Trinity College Harp. It was adopted in 1862 by the incumbent proprietor, Benjamin Lee Guinness. Harps have been a symbol of Ireland at least since the reign of Henry VIII. Guinness registered their harp as a trademark shortly after the passing of the Trade Marks Registration Act of 1875. It faces right instead of left, and so can be distinguished from the Irish coat of arms.\n\nSince the 1930s, in the face of falling sales, Guinness has had a long history of marketing campaigns, from television advertisements to beer mats and posters. Before then, Guinness had almost no advertising, instead allowing for word of mouth to sell the product.\n\nGuinness' iconic stature is partly due to its advertising. The most notable and recognisable series of advertisements was created by S.H. Benson's advertising, primarily drawn by the artist John Gilroy, in the 1930s and 1940s. Benson created posters that included phrases such as \"Guinness for Strength\", \"Lovely Day for a Guinness\", \"Guinness Makes You Strong\", \"My Goodness My Guinness\" (or, alternatively, \"My Goodness, My Christmas, It's Guinness!\"), and most famously, \"Guinness is Good For You\". The posters featured Gilroy's distinctive artwork and more often than not featured animals such as a kangaroo, ostrich, seal, lion and notably a toucan, which has become as much a symbol of Guinness as the harp. (An advertisement from the 1940s ran with the following jingle: \"\"Toucans in their nests agree/Guinness is good for you/Try some today and see/What one or toucan do.\"\") Dorothy L. Sayers and Bobby Bevan copywriters at Benson's also worked on the campaign; a biography of Sayers notes that she created a sketch of the toucan and wrote several of the adverts in question. Guinness advertising paraphernalia, notably the pastiche booklets illustrated by Ronald Ferns, attract high prices on the collectible market.\n\nMany of the best known Guinness television commercials of the 1970s and 1980s were created by British director, Len Fulford.\n\nIn 1983, a conscious marketing decision was made to turn Guinness into a \"cult\" beer in the UK, amidst declining sales. The move halted the sales decline. \"The Guardian\" described the management of the brand:\n\nIn the late 1980s and early 1990s, in the UK, there was a series of \"darkly\" humorous adverts, featuring actor Rutger Hauer, with the theme \"Pure Genius\", extolling its qualities in brewing and target market.\n\nThe 1994–1995 \"Anticipation\" campaign, featuring actor Joe McKinney dancing to \"Guaglione\" by Perez Prado while his pint settled, became a legend in Ireland and put the song to number one in the charts for several weeks. The advertisement was also popular in the UK where the song reached number two.\n\nIn 2000, Guinness' 1999 advertisement \"Surfer\" was named the best television commercial of all time, in a UK poll conducted by \"The Sunday Times\" and Channel 4. This advertisement is inspired by the famous 1980s Guinness TV and cinema ad, \"Big Wave\", centred on a surfer riding a wave while a bikini-clad sun bather takes photographs. The 1980s advertisement not only remained a popular iconic image in its own right; it also entered the Irish cultural memory through inspiring a well known line in Christy Moore's song \"Delirium Tremens\" (1985). \"Surfer\" was produced by the advertising agency Abbott Mead Vickers BBDO; the advertisement can be downloaded from their website.\n\nGuinness won the 2001 Clio Award as the Advertiser of the Year, citing the work of five separate ad agencies around the world.\n\nIn 2003, the Guinness TV campaign featuring Tom Crean won the gold Shark Award at the International Advertising Festival of Ireland, while in 2005 their Irish Christmas campaign won a silver Shark. This TV ad has been run every Christmas since its debut in December 2004 and features pictures of snow falling in places around Ireland, evoking the James Joyce story \"The Dead\", finishing at St. James's Gate Brewery with the line: \"Even at the home of the black stuff they dream of a white one\".\n\nTheir UK commercial \"noitulovE\", first broadcast in October 2005, was the most-awarded commercial worldwide in 2006. In it, three men drink a pint of Guinness, then begin to both walk and evolve backward. Their \"reverse evolution\" passes through an ancient \"Homo sapiens\", a monkey, a flying lemur, a pangolin, an ichthyosaur, and a velociraptor, until finally settling on a mud skipper drinking dirty water, which then expresses its disgust at the taste of the stuff, followed by the line: \"Good Things Come To Those Who Wait\". This was later modified to have a different endings to advertise Guinness Extra Cold, often shown as \"break bumpers\" at the beginning and end of commercial breaks. The second endings show either the \"Homo sapiens\" being suddenly frozen in a block of ice, the ichthyasaurs being frozen while swimming, or the pool of muddy water freezing over as the mud skipper takes a sip, freezing his tongue to the surface.\n\nTwo further advertisements in 2006 and early 2007, \"Hands\" and \"St. Patrick's Hands\", were created by animator Michael Schlingmann for Abbott Mead Vickers BBDO. They feature a pair of hands, animated in stop motion under a rostrum camera. \"Hands\" focuses on the 119.53 seconds it takes to pour a pint, and \"St. Patrick's Hands is a spoof of \"Riverdance\", with the animated hands doing the dancing.\n\nGuinness' 2007 advertisement, directed by Nicolai Fuglsig and filmed in Argentina, is entitled \"Tipping Point\". It involves a large-scale domino chain reaction and, with a budget of £10m, was the most expensive advertisement by the company at that point.\n\nThe 2000s also saw a series of television advertisements, entitled \"Brilliant!\" in which two crudely animated Guinness brewmasters would discuss the beer, particularly the ability to drink it straight from the bottle. The two would almost always react to their discoveries with the catchphrase \"Brilliant!\", hence the campaign's title.\n\nIn 2009, the \"To Arthur\" advertisement, which started with two friends realising the company's long history, hail each other by lifting up their glasses and saying: \"to Arthur!\". The hailing slowing spread throughout the bar to the streets outside, and finally around the world. The advertisement ends with the voiceover: \"Join the worldwide celebration, of a man named Arthur\".\n\nThis gave rise to the event now known as Arthur's Day. \"Arthur's Day is a series of events and celebrations taking place around the world to celebrate the life and legacy of Arthur Guinness and the much-loved Guinness beer which Arthur brought to the world.\"\n\nIn 2006, sales of Guinness in Ireland and the United Kingdom declined 7 per cent. Despite this, Guinness still accounts for more than a quarter of all beer sold in Ireland. By 2015, sales were on the rise in Ireland but flat globally.\n\nGuinness began retailing in India in 2007.\n\nGuinness has a significant share of the African beer market, where it has been sold since 1827. About 40 per cent of worldwide total Guinness volume is brewed and sold in Africa, with Foreign Extra Stout the most popular variant. Three of the five Guinness-owned breweries worldwide are located in Africa. The Michael Power advertising campaign was a critical success for Guinness in Africa, running for nearly a decade before being replaced in 2006 with \"Guinness Greatness\".\n\nThe beer is brewed under licence internationally in several countries, including Nigeria, the Bahamas, Canada, Cameroon, Kenya, Uganda, South Korea, Namibia, and Indonesia. The unfermented but hopped Guinness wort extract is shipped from Dublin and blended with beer brewed locally.\n\nIn 2017 Guinness teamed up with AB InBev to distribute Guinness in mainland China. China is the single biggest worldwide alcohol market, especially for imported craft beers like Guinness.\n\nThe UK is the only sovereign state to consume more Guinness than Ireland. The third-largest Guinness drinking nation is Nigeria, followed by the USA; the United States consumed more than 950,000 hectolitres of Guinness in 2010.\n\nThe Guinness Storehouse at St. James's Gate Brewery in Dublin is the most popular tourist attraction in Ireland (attracting over 1,700,000 visitors in 2017) where a self-guided tour includes an account of the ingredients used to make the stout and a description of how it is made. Visitors can sample the smells of each Guinness ingredient in the Tasting Rooms, which are coloured with a unique lighting design that emits Guinness' gold and black branding.\n\nThe \"Guinness Book of Records\" started as a Guinness marketing giveaway, based on an idea of its then Managing Director, Sir Hugh Beaver. Its holding company, Guinness World Records Ltd, was owned by Guinness plc, subsequently Diageo, until 2001.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "19350711", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19350711", "title": "Potatoes O'Brien", "text": "Potatoes O'Brien\n\nPotatoes O'Brien is a dish of pan-fried potatoes along with green and red bell peppers. The potatoes and the bell peppers are fried (varying according to taste) and are served hot. The origin of the dish is disputed. The dish has been claimed to originate in the early 1900s from a Boston restaurant known as Jerome's and from a Manhattan restaurant known as Jack's during the same time period.\n\nA variation of potatoes O'Brien includes bacon in the dish.\n\nPotatoes O'Brien can be seasoned many different ways. Typically with black pepper, paprika, salt and garlic powder.\n\n"}
{"id": "19363129", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19363129", "title": "Germanism (linguistics)", "text": "Germanism (linguistics)\n\nA Germanism is a loan word or other loan element borrowed from German for use in some other language.\n\n\nTechnology and engineering have also provided Germanisms, as in the English \"bremsstrahlung\" (a form of electromagnetic radiation), or the French \"schnorchel\" (literally, \"submarine snorkel,\" a type of air-intake device for submarine engines).\n\nIn Afrikaans, a colloquial term for ethnic Germans is \"aberjetze\", from German \"aber jetzt!\" (\"come on, now!\"), possibly due to the frequent use of that phrase by German farmers or overseers in exhorting their workers.\n\nAlbanian has many loan words brought back from Germany by migrant workers. \"Krikëll\" for \"beer mug,\" for example, is borrowed from the Austrian German term \"Krügel\". The German word \"Schalter\" has been borrowed in both its meanings (\"(office) counter\" and \"(electric) switch\") as Albanian \"shalter\". \n\nIn the early 20th century, German film directors participated in the creation of the Egyptian cinema and usually concluded their work with the word \"fertig\" (done). Their local staff kept that word in the form \"ferkish\" and soon used it in other contexts.\n\nIn connection with the football World Cup, the German team is called \"farik el Mannschaft\", with the German \"Mannschaft\" meaning team – wherein \"farik\" is already the Arabic term for \"team\" and is supplemented by the article \"el\". When at the football World Cup of 2006 the German team lost to Italy, a saying went \"el Mannschaft khessret!\" (\"The Mannschaft lost!\")\n\nIn Sudan, the German word \"Kollege\" (colleague) acquired a very unusual importance. There it means straw, which was bound to a bundle for drying. The background to this important change is that colleagues are seen in the context of staying closely together.\n\nIn Bassa, a tribal language in Cameroon, the word for \"train station\" is \"banop\" from the German \"Bahnhof\", which recalls the Germans building the first railway in their former colony.\n\nBeginning in the 14th and more so since the 15th cent. in towns there were always German merchants, and eventually also Jews, who also spoke a German dialect. Major towns received from the king/duke privileges known as the \"Magdeburg Law\". This show words such as \"čynš\" (чынш) from German \"Zins\" for \"(economic) interest\", \"handal\" (гандаль) from German \"Handel\" for \"trade\" and \"štempel\" (штэмпэль) from German \"Stempel\" for \"rubber stamp\". Other examples are \"hiešeft\" (гешэфт) from German \"Geschäft\" for \"business\" and \"falšavać\" (фальшаваць) from German \"fälschen\" for \"counterfeiting\". Some Germanisms were borrowed from Polish, which increased its influence in the 17th and 18th cent.: achviara - (Opfer) - victim; chvalia: (Welle) - wave; kštałt (Gestalt: form, shape); gvałt (Gewalt: violence); pliac (Platz): city square, place; košt and kaštavać (Kosten): cost; krama (Kram): shop; jarmarka (Jahrmarkt : annual fair, or simply fair or market; kirmaša: (Kirmes) - tradefair or funfair; paliac (Palast or Palatz): palace; hrošy (Groschen - coins): money; kierunak (possibly from German regieren which earlier meant: to lead )- direction; kieravać (to lead or to drive a car; hatunak (Gattung) - type, sort; rachunak (Rechnung): bill, check; šacunak (Schätzung): appreciation; šliah (Schlag): way, road, (from schlagen: to beat, as in the \"beaten path\"; šmat (Schmatt - (Vienna German) tips (to waiters) - now meaning: a lot, much; šmatki: (probably Yiddish šmotes: rags) - rags, cheap clothes; karol (from Karl= Charlemagne): king; vinšavać (wünschen) - to wish someone something); rynak: (Ring) - market; possibly also \"rada\" (Rat - council, advise) and the verb paraić (pa- is a prefix) - to council, to advise; but almost certainly \"ratuša\" - (Rathaus): town hall. And varta: Wert - worth. Almost all Germanisms can also be found in the Ukrainian language, since they share origin in the language of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, sometimes called Old Belarusan. After the Russian conquest many Russian words of German origin penetrated into Belarusan, e.g. aficer - (Offizier) - officer in the military.\n\nBosnian has a number of loanwords from German: šlager (hit, from Schlager), šminka (make-up, from Schminke), šnajder (tailor, from Schneider), šunka (ham, from Schinken) etc. In the Bosnian language \"rikverc\" means the reverse gear of a vehicle that is best to be \"rostfraj\", stainless. The German equivalents are \"rückwärts\" and \"rostfrei\" respectively.\n\nGerman words which were adopted into the Bulgarian language include \"бормашина\", \"drill\", from German \"Bohrmaschine\", \"ауспух\", \"exhaust pipe\" from \"Auspuff\", \"шибидах\" from \"Schiebedach\" and in the skiing sport the term \"Шус\", which is the same as the English \"schuss\", was adopted from \"Schussfahrt\", a steep and fast ride downhill.\n\nEven the German word \"Anzug\", \"suit\", is used in Bulgarian. However, it means \"tracksuit\" there.\n\nOne of the very few German loan words in Chinese is the word for storm drain covers, \"Gullideckel\" in German. The common Chinese term for \"rain water hole\", 雨水口, \"yushuikou\", is called \"guli\", 骨瀝, in the Qingdao form – contrary to the rest of China. The Chinese learned of storm drains for city sewage in the German lease area of Jiaozhou. The approximately 40 German loan words that are in use in Qingdao still include the word 大嫚, \"daman\", for \"Damen\", \"ladies\" with 胶州大嫚 meaning \"Jiaozhou-women\".\n\nIn the Austro-Hungarian monarchy, typical Austrian German words such as paradajz (Paradeiser meaning \"from paradise\", for tomato, the verbatim translation \"rajčica\" is increasingly used), \"špajza\" (Speise, \"food\", used in the sense of \"pantry\"), \"knedli\" (Knödel, \"dumplings\"), \"putar\" (Butter, \"butter\", natively \"maslac\"), \"ribizli\" (Ribisel, \"currants\"), \"šnicla\" (Schnitzel, \"flat piece of meat\", natively \"odrezak\"), \"Fijaker\" (Fiaker, \"fiacre\"), \"foranga\" (Vorhang, \"curtain\", natively \"zavjesa\"), \"herceg\" (Herzog, \"Duke\", natively \"vojvoda\"), \"majstor\" (Meister, \"master\", often in the sense of \"repairman\") or \"tišljar\" (Tischler, \"carpenter\", natively \"stolar\").\n\nSimilarly, words such as \"pleh\" (Blech, \"tin\"), \"cajger\" (Zeiger, \"pointer\"), \"žaga\" (Säge, \"saw\"), \"šalter\" (Schalter, \"switch\"), \"šrafciger\" (Schraubenzieher, \"screwdriver\", natively \"odvijač\") or \"curik\" or \"rikverc\" (Zurück, \"back\" or rückwärts \"backwards\", for the reverse gear) are common in Croatia. Especially in the technical fields there are almost no phonetic differences with the German words, and most Croats understand these without good language skills in German.\n\nLess commonly, the terms \"špajscimer\" (Speisezimmer, \"dining room\"), \"badecimer\" (Badezimmer, \"bathroom\"), \"forcimer\" (Vorzimmer, \"hall\"), \"šlafcimer\" (Schlafzimmer, \"bedroom\") and \"cimer fraj\" (Zimmer frei, \"free room\") are used in the colloquial language, as these newer loans mainly appear in advertising aimed for German tourists.\n\nThe washing machine is often referred to colloquially as \"vešmašina\" (Waschmaschine, natively \"perilica za rublje\"). Somewhat odd is the use of the term \"cušpajz\" (Zuspeise, \"additional food\") for a kind of vegetable stew.\n\nThe Czech language borrowed some words from neighbouring dialects such as \"hajzl\" (from \"Häusl\" for a little house) for toilet. In \"hřbitov\" (cemetery) comes from \"hrob\" (tomb), which comes from German Grab. \n\nGerman import words were so frequently, that already Jan Hus 1412 vehemently opposed them. There were words like \"hantuch\" from German \"Handtuch\" for towel, \"šorc\" from \"Schürze\" for apron, \"knedlík\" from \"Knödel\", \"hausknecht\", German \"Hausknecht\", for servant and \"forman\" from \"Fuhrmann\" for waggoner. But Hus did not succeed. Knedlíky are still served, and in 1631, the school reformer Jan Amos Komenský didn't have a problem to translate the biblical term paradise with \"lusthaus\" (German \"Lusthaus\" \"house of joy\").\n\nIn the late 19th century, many Czech craftsmen worked in the German-speaking area of the Danube monarchy. The Czech language took many loan words from this category: \"ermloch\" from German \"Ärmelloch\" for arm hole, \"flikovat\" from German \"flicken\" for darning and \"piglovat\" from \"bügeln\" for ironing.\n\nIn domestic disputes, German was a supplier of cuss words. Václav Havel used the word \"glajchšaltace\" (German \"Gleichschaltung\") to denounce the forced bringing-into-line, and called his counterpart Václav Klaus an \"oberkašpar.\" (German vernacular \"Oberkaspar\" literally \"master Kasperle\", \"master buffoon\"). He, in turn, called a Havel a \"lump\" (German \"Lump\": approximately rascal, rapscallion). Sometimes opponents completely use German in order to ininhibit insult each other. Such an insult for example may be \"Sie blöde Ente\" \"you stupid duck\" (in German, this animal however is usually not used as a cuss...)\n\nOther (sometimes used colloquially) Germanisms in Czech:\n\nThe modern Danish language emerged after centuries of heavy German influence due to the fact that Christianity was brought by German monks, and that nearly all clerks at the royal court were (literate) Germans. Thus well over half of the Danish lexical mass came in the 13th cent. and is of German origin, though not the basic grammatical structure, which remained Scandinavian. The same is true for Swedish, while the Norwegian in its most used form is in fact Danish, albeit with a very different pronunciation. It is in fact difficult to compile a full Danish sentence which would not include any old German words. This process was reinforced in the 18th cent. with a new wave of German clerks at the court of kings and queens who were to a great extent German princes. \n\nThe interesting words in this respect are those who were not integrated into the language, but are openly used as Germanisms. The German term \"Hab und Gut\", \"Habseligkeiten\", is used in the form of \"habengut\" to express one's possessions carried along. The word was introduced to Denmark by travelling journeymen who took all their possessions along with them. \n\"Fingerspitzgefühl\" is commonly used in the original German sense: sensitivity, feeling with the tips of your fingers. The old German princely quote \"So ein Ding müssen wir auch haben\" (We should also have one of those things) is even the title of a TV show about electronics. \nThe expression \"Det sker i de bedste familier\" (It happens in the best of families) is a crude translation of the German \"Es kommt in den besten Familien vor\". \n\n\"Bundesliga-hår\" (\"Bundesliga hair\") is the Danish word for a mullet, because this type of haircut (as well as in Hungary) was regarded a characteristic of football Bundesliga players. Also the Italians saw this kind of connection and dubbed it \"capelli alla tedesca\" (German style haircut).\n\nThe Dutch language includes some well established words from German, for example \"überhaupt\" (at all, generally), \"sowieso\" (anyway/certainly), \"Fingerspitzengefühl\" (roughly \"sensitivity\", literally \"finger tip feel\").\n\nThe word \"unheimisch\" is used for something scary. (In Germany only another form of this word is still used: \"unheimlich\") \n\nIn sports, the words \"Schwalbe\" (in German the bird swallow, but also used for diving (football)), \"Alleingang\" (German for solo, also used in a figurative sense), \"Ausputzer\" (sweeper) and \"die Mannschaft\" (the team, for the German national soccer team) are used.\n\nOne notable German word in the English language is \"kindergarten\", meaning \"garden for the children\". The first kindergarten outside the German area was founded in 1851 in London. Five years later, Margarethe Schurz opened the first kindergarten in America in Watertown, Wisconsin. The language in the first kindergarten was German, as they were thought to be for the children of German immigrants. In 1882, the number of kindergartens in the US was 348. Meanwhile, the majority of Americans are no longer aware of the German origin of the word. The kindergarten teacher was first called \"kindergartner\", and later \"kindergarten teacher\". \"Kindergartner\" is now the child who attends the kindergarten. The verb \"to kindergarten\" means using the kindergarten method. Often, however, only the first letter 'K' of the word \"kindergarten\" is used, so a \"pre-K\" is a child who is not old enough for kindergarten.\n\nIn English, the German \"über\" (hyper, over) is sometimes (often spelled \"uber\") used in compositions, as in ubergeek, to express extreme progression. In German on the other hand, the prefix \"Über\" is rarely used in the sense of superior, instead, \"Super\" is used, as in . The peculiar feature of the German language to build compound nouns contributes to proliferation of Germanisms and interesting neologisms.\n\nAmerican students often use the term \"foosball\" (German \"Fußball\") for the tabletop football, for which in Germany however the English term \"kicker\" is used.\n\nIf somebody is sneezing, one may respond \"[god] bless you\". Because many people don't want to use a blessing phrase with religious context, instead the German term \"gesundheit\" is widely used. In German, \"Gesundheit\" means health, but is also used as response when someone sneezes. The same word is used in Yiddish, and thus came to be known also in the US. \n\nThe Concise Oxford English Dictionary lists the German word \"verboten\", defined as \"forbidden by an authority\". Weltschmerz, Schadenfreude, Brat, kaput, Weltanschauung. Another important psychological concept is \"Angst\".\n\nThere are long-lasting contacts between Estonian and German languages. Estonia was conquered in the Livonian crusade by German and Danish crusaders already in the 13th century. Since then, Estonia was settled by priests, merchants and craftsmen from Germany. As a result, the Estonian language has borrowed nearly a third of its vocabulary from Germanic languages, mainly from German. Examples include: \"vein\" (Wein, wine), \"klaver\" (Klavier, piano), \"reis\" (Reise, trip) and \"kunst\" (art). Modern loans from the Germans include \"reisibüroo\" (Reisebüro, travel agency) and \"kleit\" (Kleid, dress).\n\nIn French, some Germanisms are due to the experiences in the Second World War, such as \"witz\" for a bad joke or threatening (in German, \"Witz\" is just joke) and \"ersatz\" for ersatz coffee (German \"Ersatzkaffee\", but more usually \"Muckefuck\", itself probably a Francesism from \"mocca faux\"). The word \"lied\", same meaning in English and French, is derived from the German \"Lied\" which translates as \"song\". (In German, the term \"Lied\" refers to any kind of song, however for contemporary music in German also often the anglicism \"Song\" is used.)\n\nIn French the word \"vasistas\" denotes a skylight window. The word probably originates from the Napoleonic Wars, when French soldiers looking at the German skylight ask \"Was ist das?\" (What is this?) It then became the name for this kind of windows.\n\n\"Schubladiser\" is the Swiss French term for filing or procrastinating something. The noun is \"schubladisation\". \"Schublade\" is German for drawer, therefore these Swiss French terms can be literally translated as \"drawering\" and \"drawerisation\", resp.\n\nIn Swiss French, there are some terms derived from (Swiss) German such as \"poutzer\" instead of \"nettoyer\" (cleaning, in German \"putzen\") or \"speck\" instead of \"lard\" (bacon, in German \"Speck\").\n\nAround the German-French border areas, inherently many words cross the language border, for example, in Lorraine: Instead of \"ça éclabousse\", \"ça spritz\" is used for \"this sputters\" – \"spritzen\" is \"sputtering\" in German. \"Spritz\" as a term for extruded biscuits (\"Spritzgebäck\" in German) is known everywhere in France.\n\nModern Greek uses a few German loanwords for terms related to German or Austrian culture, such as \"snitsel\" (\"σνίτσελ\"; Schnitzel) and \"froilain\" (\"φροϊλάιν\", from Fräulein, \"Miss\", used only for young women from Germany or Austria). Some loan words were introduced by the \"gastarbáiter\" (\" γκασταρμπάιτερ \", German Gastarbeiter), who have spent part of their life in Germany or Austria, such as lumben (λούμπεν ), meaning \"riffraff\", from German \"Lump\", \"rogue\".\n\nThe modern Hebrew includes several Germanisms, some coming directly from German, and some via the Yiddish language. In the artisanal sector, some German phrases such as \"stecker\" (German \"Stecker\" for plug) and \"dübel\" (German \"Dübel\" for dowel), the latter pronounced due to the missing \"ü\" umlaut. \n\nThe German word \"Strudel\" (שטרודל) in Hebrew is used for the character \"@\" in E-mail addresses, after the shape of the pastry.\n\nA Hebrew slang for siesta, is \"schlafstunde\" (German literally \"hour to sleep\"), although it is not clear whether the Yekkes started that habit in Israel or brought it from Germany.\n\nThe modern month names in Israel correspond to the German names: \"Januar\", \"Februar\", \"März\", etc. The only modification is \"August\" which is – different from the German – pronounced \"Ogust\", because the vocal connection \"au\" in Hebrew is unusual.\n\nThe German vocabulary had already influenced the Hungarian language at the time of the marriage of the state's founder Stephen I of Hungary to princess Giselle of Bavaria in the year 996. An early example is the word \"Herzog\" (\"Duke\"). The Hungarian word \"herceg\" formed as a result of vowel harmony, the alignment of vowels in a word. This Hungarian word was later borrowed into South Slavic languages and gave rise to the geographical name Hercegovina.\n\nGerman clergy, farmers and craftsmen were linguistically influential, particularly in the 13th and 18th centuries, bringing their own terminology to Hungary. These include the job titles \"bakter\" (\"Wächter\", night watchman, train guard), \"suszter\" (\"Schuster\", cobbler) and \"sintér\" (\"Schinder\", a knacker) as well as the terms \"kuncsaft\" (\"Kundschaft\", customer) and \"mester\" (\"Meister\", master). In some professions, a large part of technical terms came via German, e.g. in the field of carpentry \"lazur\" (\"Lasur\", glaze), \"firnisz\" (\"Firnis\", lacquer), \"lakk\" (\"Lack\", varnish), \"smirgli\" (\"Schmirgelpapier\", sandpaper) and \"colstok\" (\"Zollstock\", foot rule).\n\nWords were also loaned in the time of the monarchs from the House of Habsburg. This explains a number of German words that are mainly used in Austria. These include the words \"krampusz\" (Krampus, companion of Santa Claus), \"partvis\" (\"Bartwisch\", hand brooms), \"nokedli\" (\"Nocken\", dumpling), and \"ribizli\" (\"Ribisel\", currant). \"Eszcájg\" derives from \"Esszeug\". Second-hand goods dealers were called \"handlé\" (\"Händler\", merchant). Further examples include \"fasírt\" (Austrian German \"faschiert\", minced meat) and \"knődli\" (\"Knödel\", hot dumplings).\n\nEven a German sentence became a Hungarian word. \"Vigéc\", derived from the German greeting \"Wie geht's?\" (How are you?) is the Hungarian word for a door-to-door salesman. The word \"spájz\" (\"Speis\", Austrian German for \"Speisekammer\") is being used for the pantry.<br>\nThe Hungarian phrase \"nem nagy vasziszdasz\" (\"not a big what-is-it\") is an informal way of belittling the complexity/importance of something (from German \"was ist das?\", \"what is it?\").\n\nSometimes linguistic communities borrow the same term for a word from each other's language. This is the case for razzia – the Germans taken their word \"Razzia\" from the Italians (originally Arab غزوة ghazwa = \"razzia\"), the Italians use the term \"blitz\" for this, from the German word \"Blitzkrieg\". \"Un lager\" in Italian is not a beer like in English, but short for \"Konzentrationslager\".\n\nGerman tourists's demand brought \"il wurstel\" to Italy (\"Würstel\" is a German dialect word for sausages), and even \"il wurstel con krauti\" (German \"Kraut\" short for \"Sauerkraut\").\n\nIn Japanese include some words with German origin, such as アルバイト (\"arubaito\") from the German \"Arbeit\" (\"work\", \"job\"); however, in Japan it is used to denote a minor job, e.g., a student's sideline.\n\nOther words transferred into Japanese are related to climbing, like ヒュッテ (\"hyutte\") from German \"Hütte\" for mountain hut, ゲレンデ (\"gerende\") from German \"Gelände\" for terrain, アイゼン (\"aizen\") from German \"Eisen\" (short for \"Steigeisen\") for crampons, エーデルワイス (\"ēderuwaisu\") for Edelweiß, リュックサック (\"ryukkusakku\") from German \"Rucksack\" for backpack and probably also シュラフ (\"shurafu\") from German \"Schlafsack\" for sleeping bag. Also, the main Japanese mountain chain is called Japanese Alps.\n\nDuring the Second World War, in Japanese weekly newsreels the military victories of the German Generalfeldmarschall Erwin Rommel in Africa were frequently celebrated, thus establishing \"rommel\" as the Japanese term for victory or success. Even today, Japanese football mascots are called with this word.\n\nSince the medical education initially was influenced by its German teachers, many German medical terms became part of the Japanese language. These include クランケ (\"kuranke\") from German \"Kranke\" as a term for the sick ones, カルテ (\"karute\") from German \"Karte\" (card) in the sense of a card to record the course of disease of a patient, ギプス (\"gipusu\") from German \"Gips\" for an orthopedic cast, アレルギー (\"arerugī\") from German \"Allergie\" for allergy, and ノイローゼ (\"noirōze\") from German \"Neurose\" for neurosis. Even the word オルガスムス (\"orugasumusu\") for orgasm originates from the German word \"Orgasmus\".\n\nOf the typical German food items, the most commonly found in Japan are ザワークラウト (\"sawākurauto\", Sauerkraut) and the cake specialties シュトレン (\"shutoren\", Stollen) and バウムクーヘン (\"baumukūhen\", Baumkuchen).\n\nSee also gairaigo.\n\nThe German language also influenced Kashubian and other Slavic languages, for example \"kajuta\" from German \"Kajüte\" for (ship) cabin, \"bùrméster\" from German \"Bürgermeister\" for mayor or \"hańdel\" from German \"Handel\" for trade\".\nIn Kashubian \"szlafrok\" from German \"Schlafrock\" is a dressing-gown.\nA Kashubian craftsman uses a \"szruwa\" (screw, from German \"Schraube\"). \n\nIn Kirundi, the language of the African Great Lakes country Burundi, the word for German people (the former colonial rulers) is \"dagi\". That is derived from the German salutation \"Tag\", short for \"Guten Tag\" (literally \"[I wish you a] good day\").\n\nIn order to remove the last relics of the occupation during the Second World War, in South Korea most Japanese loanwords are removed from the vocabulary. This does not include the word 아르바이트 (\"areubaiteu\") with is still used both in the Korean and Japanese language. The Japanese アルバイト (\"arubaito\") is derived from the German word \"Arbeit\" (work, job), but here denotes a student's sideline.\n\nAlthough a majority of internationalisms (largely Latin or Greek-based) are borrowed from English, a considerable minority of internationalisms are borrowed from German, usually via Japanese, in the field of chemistry, medicine, philosophy, etc., such as 요오드 (\"yoodeu\" < Iod), 망간 (\"manggan\" < Mangan), 부탄 (\"butan\" < Butan), 알레르기 (\"allereugi\" < Allergie), 히스테리 (\"hiseuteri\" < Hysterie), 이데올로기 (\"ideollogi\" < Ideologie), 테마 (\"Tema\" < Thema), etc. In addition, there are also loanwords of native German origin, such as 코펠 (\"kopel\" (portable cooker), a corrupted form of Kocher, via Japanese コッヘル \"kohheru\"), and hybrids like 메스실린더 (\"meseusillindeo\" <German \"Mess-\" (measuring) + English \"cylinder\"; \"Messzylinder\" in German).\n\nIn Macedonian, the denotation of \"witz\" is виц, similar as in French.\n\nThe German word \"Vorspiel\" translates to \"prelude\", also with sexual connotation, and \"Nachspiel\" translates to aftermath. In contrast, in Norwegian the words \"vorspiel\" and \"nachspiel\" stand for the consumption of alcoholic beverages before or after a visit of bars or discothèques (German \"vorglühen\", a quite recent neologism reflecting the use of Glühwein, and \"Absacker\").\n\nThe German language also influenced Polish and other Slavic languages, for example \"kajuta\" from German \"Kajüte\" for (ship) cabin, \"sztorm\" from German \"Sturm\" for storm, \"burmistrz\" from German \"Bürgermeister\" for mayor, \"szynka\" from German \"Schinken\" for ham, or \"handel\" from German \"Handel\" for trade\". The German influence on Polish (and on to Belarusan, Ukrainian and even Russian) is significant. Thus: rynek (Ring - square or place or market); plac - Platz - square; cegła - Ziegel - brick; budynek - Büding - building (medieval High German) - with scores of derivatives on building materials, etc. Gmach (building) - from Gemach - a room. \n\nIn Polish, \"szlafmyca\" from German \"Schlafmütze\" means night cap, but – as in German – also used in a figurative sense as sleepyhead. \"Szlafrok\" from German \"Schlafrock\" is a dressing-gown.\n\nA Polish craftsman uses a \"śruba\" (screw, from German \"Schraube\") and \"klajster\" (paste/glue from German \"Kleister\"). If he does not know the name of his tool, he may ask for a \"wihajster\" (thingamabob, from German \"Wie heißt er?\", literally \"how is it called?\"). And will receive the requested thing:\nThere is also the word \"fajrant\" (leisure-time, from German \"Feierabend\"). In a carousal, he can drink to someone \"bruderszaft\" (from German \"Bruderschaft\", fraternity) and disband with a \"rausz\" (from German \"Rausch\", inebriation).\n\nPortuguese incorporates German words such as \"diesel\" and \"kitsch.\"\n\nIn Brazilian Portuguese, German immigrants brought some German words. The word \"blitz\" describes a traffic control (German \"Blitz\" is flash, also colloquial for traffic control due to the flash light.) Also known are \"malzbier\", \"quark\" and \"chopp\", the latter from \"Schoppen\" (German for a pint, in Brazilian Portuguese however denoting a draught beer). Also, in Brazil the German \"Streuselkuchen\" is a cuca, spread on a bread in the Riograndian Hunsrückian became, via the German \"schmier\" (grease), \"chimia\". In the areas of German immigraints, also \"oktoberfest\" and \"kerb\" (Hunsrückian for kermesse) are celebrated. The word \"chipa\" is derived from the German \"Schippe\" (shovel).\n\nIn Romanian, German loans are especially found in names for craft items: \"bormaşină\" (drill, in German \"Bohrmaschine\"), \"ştecher\" (plug, \"Stecker\"), \"şurub\" (screw, \"Schr[a]ube\"), \"şubler\" (vernier caliper, \"Schublehre\"), \"şnur\" (electric cord, German \"Schnur\" is cord in general), but there are also: \n\nAfter Tsar Peter the Great returned from Western Europe in the year 1698, the loan words were no longer taken from Greek and Polish. With Peter, transfers from Polish were replaced by transfers from Western languages. For the drastic reforms in the military and administration, economic and administrative experts were recruited from Germany. 1716 Peter ordered that the administrative writers learn German:\nIn some sectors of handicraft, the Germans were the majority; towards the end of the 18th Century, thirty German but only three Russian watchmakers worked in St. Petersburg .\n\nThe Russian has taken many words regarding military matters from German, for example \"Schlagbaum\" \"шлагбаум\" (turnpike) and \"Marschroute\" \"маршрут\" (route), and also \"рюкзак\" (backpack), \"Massstab\" \"масштаб\" (scale, extent), \"Strafe\" \"штраф\" (in German \"punishment\", in Russian in the meaning \"fine\", but \"штрафбат - штрафной батальон\" - punishment unit in the military), and \"Zifferblatt\" \"циферблат\" (clock face). Also \"фейерверк - Feuerwerk\" - fireworks. \"Вахта - Wacht\" - guard; Military ranks: \"ефрейтер: Gefreiter\" - corporal; \"лейтенант - Leutnant\" - lieutenant; \"комендант - Kommandant\" - commander; \"граф: Graf\" - count and \"Графство\" - county. Also \"плацдарм - Platzdarm\" - drill area in the military, also theater of operations - originally obviously from French \"place d'armes\". Apparently \"картофель - potato\" also comes from German: Kartoffel. \"Штат\" (\"Staat\") means a state (like the United States), but not the concept of state in general. \"Штатный\" - means civilian (clothes), or employee (on the payroll). The origin of the word re: civilian clothes can be another German word: Stadt - city, i.e. city clothes. The word for soldier is \"солдат\" - from German \"Soldat\", albeit French at its origin. A scrue is called \"винт\" - from German \"Gewinde\" - screw thread, apparently through Polish \"gwind\". From that \"винтовка\" - rifle. Also through Polish: \"казарма\" - barracks - from German \"Kaserne\" - via Polish \"Kazarma\", originally Italian \"caserma\" - arsenal. \n\nMikhail Lomonosov, who studied in Marburg and Freiberg, is regarded as founder of the Russian mining science, mineralogy and geology. In his writings about mining and metallurgy, he uses German words, the names of metals and minerals \"Wismut\" \"Висмут\" (bismuth), \"Wolfram\" \"Вольфрам\" (tungsten), \"Gneis\" \"Гнейс\" (gneiss, \"Kwarz\" (in German spelled Quarz) \"Кварц\" (quartz), \"Potasch\" (in German Pottasche) \"Поташ\" (potash), \"Zink\" \"Цинк\" (zinc), \"Schpaty\" (German Spat) \"шпаты\" (feldspar), and the expression \"schteiger\" (German \"Steiger\") (foreman of miners). Also the terms \"geolog\" (German Geologe) (geologist), \"gletscher\" (glacier) \"metallurgia\" (German \"Metallurgie\") (\"metallurgy\"), \"nikel\" (in German Nickel), \"schichta\" (German \"Schicht\" (layer), used both for ore layer and layer in a blast furnace), and \"schlif\" (German Schliff) (the grinding or cutting of a stone) fall into this category. \n\nTerms from chess are \"Zugzwang\" \"цугцванг\", \"Zeitnot\" \"цейтнот\", \"Endspiel\" \"эндшпиль\" (endgame), Mittelspiel\" \"мительшпиль\" (middlegame), \"Grossmeister\" \"(гроссмейстер) (grandmaster).\n\nModern expressions are \"Strichcode\" \"штрихкод\" (barcode), \"Butterbrot\" \"бутерброд\", and even \"Brandmauer\", for which in German the English expression is used.\n\n\"Schram\" \"Шрам\" is a scar and originates from the German word \"Schramme\" (scratch, scar). A \"schtolnja\" \"штольня\" (German \"Stollen\") is an adit. A \"schpagat\" \"шпагат\" (German spelling Spagat) is a Split (gymnastics), \"schpinat\" \"шпинат\" (German spelling Spinat) spinach and a \"schpion\" \"шпион\" (German spelling Spion) a spy.\n\nEven the hockey term for puck, \"schajba\" \"шайба\", originates from German \"Scheibe\", denoting a Washer. The word \"schlang\" \"шланг\" for garden hose is derived from the German word for a snake, \"Schlange\". The word \"schtepsel\" \"штепсель\" originates from the German word \"Stöpsel\" (plug). Buzhgalter (Busthalter), Schachmati (Schach), (K)artoffel.\n\nAn exhibition in Vienna about Gastarbeiter in Austria has the Serbian title \"gastarbajteri\". A particularly avid student is called \"štreber\" (German \"Streber\" is striver). \"Schlag\" for cream is derived from the Austrian short form for \"Schlagobers\".\n\nThe Serbian word for tomatoes, \"Парадајз\" \"(paradajs)\", is influenced from the Austrian \"Paradeiser\".\n\nExamples of germanisms:\n\n\nSwedes use the German word \"aber\" (but) in the sense of \"obstacle\" or \"objection\". A nouveau riche is called \"Gulaschbaron\" (colloquialism in German language, literally \"goulash baron\").\n\nFor undercover investigative journalism in the style of Günter Wallraff the verb \"wallraffa\" is used, which is even part of the Swedish Academy's dictionary.\n\nSlovene Germanisms are primarily evident in the syntax, lexicon, semantics, and phraseology of the language. There are few Germanisms in Slovene phonology and morphology. Many Slovene lexical Germanisms come from Austrian German.\n\nThe Spanish language of some South American countries incorporates Germanisms introduced by German immigrants, for example, in Chile \"kuchen\" (cake) and \"Frankfurter\" in Uruguay. The latter, however, sometimes is used for a hot dog – not as in German for the sausage only. In Argentine, the usage of the name \"Pancho\" is interesting: it's a popular nickname for \"Francisco\" or \"Franco\", and therefore also used for \"Frank\"furter sausages. The Chileans pronounce \"kuchen\" as in German with the ach-Laut, not \"kutshen\", as a Spanish pronunciation would be.\n\nIn Chile, the German word \"suche\" (searching) (pronounced in Chile \"sutsche\" instead of with the German ach-Laut) is used for house staff (gardeners, errand boys). After the German immigrants came to a certain prosperity, they posted job advertisements for local forces, which often started with the German verb \"suche\" in a large-size font.\n\nIn Mexico, \"kermes\", from the German word \"Kirmes\" (funfair, kermesse), is used for a charitable street party.\n\nThe dominant lingua franca in the African Great Lakes region, Swahili, has borrowed many words from Arabic and English. Borrowed from the German \"Schule\", however, is the word \"shule\" for school.\n\nEven the Kreol Tok Pisin in the former German colony Papua-New Guinea has words borrowed from German language. These include \"balaistift\" from German \"Bleistift\" for \"pencil\", however today the English term is preferred. \"Raus\" (literally in German \"get out!\" means \"Go!\" or \"From the way\". Derived from \"raus\" is \"rausim\" meaning \"empty\", \"dismissed away.\"\n\nA reminder of the missionary by German Catholic lay brothers are the words \"bruda\" from German \"Bruder\" for brother and \"prista\" from German \"Priester\" for priests. A relic of German colonialists' behaviour are invectives such as \"rinfi\" from German \"Rindvieh\", literally cattle, but used also as invective for a silly person, and \"saise\" from German \"Scheiße\", shit.\n\nThe Turkish word \"fertik\" as signal for a railway to be ready to depart originates from the Baghdad Railway which was initially operated by German personnel. The Germans command \"fertig\" (ready) became the Turkish \"fertik\" and firstly also denoted the train conductor. Nevertheless, this word was only used in slang and became obsolete soon after the 1950s.\n\nAnother Germanism is \"Otoban\" from German \"Autobahn\" for highway.\n\nThe Modern Hebrew \"iton\" for newspaper is modeled after the German word \"Zeitung\", using \"et\" for \"time\" (\"Zeit\" in German).\n\nGermanisms in foreign languages may have gone through a change of meaning, appearing as false friend to the learned's eye. For instance, in Russian галстук \"galstuk\" is not a scarf (German literally: \"\"Halstuch\"\"), but a tie, even though the modern German equivalent \"Krawatte\" (Croatian neck tie) seems to be of a more recent date; nor would a парикмахер \"parikmacher\" (German literally: \"\"Perückenmacher\"\") be a \"wig-maker\", but actually is a hairdresser. It seems, though, that the hair dresser was indeed called a wig maker, i.e. when wigs were in fashion and that was what they did. Thus both Italians (parrucchiere) and Spaniards (peluquero) still call all hair dressers, for gentlemen and ladies, wig makers. \n\nLikewise, in Japanese, a \"messer\" is not a knife, but a scalpel. Two more examples would be Japanese アルバイト (transliterated to \"arubaito\", derived from German: \"Arbeit\" [\"work\"] and abbreviated to \"baito\") and リュックサック (transliterated to \"ryukkusakku\"; derived from German \"Rucksack\"; abbreviated to リュック [\"ryukku\"]).\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "19367860", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19367860", "title": "Screwball (ice cream)", "text": "Screwball (ice cream)\n\nA screwball is a type of frozen confection that first appeared in the 1970s. It consists of a flavored sorbet like frozen dessert inside a conical, plastic cup with a gumball at the bottom; the flavor of the ice is usually raspberry ripple. Several prominent brands produce screwballs, for example Asda, Popsicle, and Eskimo Pie. The name was originally a commercial product name but is now used to describe all such ice cream treats, whoever makes them. The product does not qualify as ice cream under USDA guidelines. \n\n'Two Ball Screwball' is a brand name (in the United States, a registered trademark) for a screwball containing two gumballs. The original flavor was cherry but it has also been introduced a multiple flavored twist of lemon and blue raspberry. As with all screwballs, the shape is that of an upside down cone with the gumballs at the bottom.\n"}
{"id": "19385209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19385209", "title": "Sanna (dish)", "text": "Sanna (dish)\n\nSannas () are spongy steamed savoury rice cakes originating from the Indian subcontinent. They are popular in Goa and Mangalore in Karnataka, India, especially among the Goans, both Hindus and Catholics, the Konkani diaspora of Karnataka and of a small community settled in Kerala, and the East Indians and the Kupari Catholic community based in and around Mumbai.\n\nSannas were often called \"Hitt\" or \"Hittli\" in old Konkani by Hindus, and are now commonly known as \"Idli\". They are made on various religious occasions such as Ganesh Chaturthi, Saunsar padvo/Yugadi and Makar Sankranti, whereas Catholics prepare them during church feasts. Sometimes a sweet version is made with jaggery, known as \"godachi sanna\" (). \nHindus normally use urad dal, coconut water and coconut milk for fermentation. Catholic sannas consist of two types: toddy-fermented sannas and those made using the sap of the coconut palm.\n\nMangalorean Catholic Cuisine is incomplete without sannas. They are a much-loved bread served with pork bafat, a spicy pork dish prepared with a medley of powdered spices. Sannas are also served alongside chicken or mutton curries, or can be eaten for breakfast with coconut chutney or sambhar, or with sweet coconut milk sweetened with jaggery and flavoured with cardamom.\n\nIn modern times toddy-fermented sannas are rarely made. Instead, the batter can be leavened with yeast.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "19396733", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19396733", "title": "Psarosoupa", "text": "Psarosoupa\n\nPsarosoupa () is a fish soup, traditional to Greek cuisine. There are several variations on the soup. All include fish and vegetables. \n\nThe types of fish used vary: carp, cod, hake, mackerel, salmon, skate, trout, turbot, perch, haddock, and swordfish are all possibilities. Some prefer a firm, white-fleshed fish, such as grouper, snapper, or rockfish, and avoid more oily fish.\n\n\nPsarosoupa may be served with retsina.\n\n"}
{"id": "19410262", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19410262", "title": "Dara Moskowitz Grumdahl", "text": "Dara Moskowitz Grumdahl\n\nDara Moskowitz Grumdahl is a food and wine writer, based in Minneapolis, Minnesota.\n\nDara Moskowitz was born and raised in New York City and graduated from Stuyvesant High School in 1988. She got her start in the world of food as a dishwasher. She graduated from Carleton College in Northfield, Minnesota in 1992. She lives with her family in Minneapolis and is a senior writer for \"Mpls.St.Paul Magazine\".\n\nOriginally focusing on fiction writing, she won two Minnesota State Arts Board grants, a fellowship from the Loft McKnight foundation, and the Tamarack Award in 1994. She was chosen by Joyce Carol Oates for the anthology \"American Fiction, Volume Nine: The Best Unpublished Short Stories by Emerging Authors\". Her primary outlet for food writing from 1995 to 2008 was in the \"City Pages\", a Minneapolis-St. Paul alternative weekly owned by Village Voice Media. Currently, she works for MSP Communications, where she writes for both Delta Sky Magazine as a travel writer and Mpls St. Paul Magazine with a restaurant column, profiles, and feature stories. She has been nominated for eleven James Beard Awards for both her food and wine writing and has won five times; her most recent nomination was for an MFK Fisher Distinguished Writing Award for “The Cheese Artist”. In both 2011 and 2013 she won the City and Regional Magazine Association Award as the nation’s best restaurant critic in a city magazine. She has also written for \"Gourmet Magazine\", \"USA Today\", \"Wine & Spirits\", \"Bon Appetit\", \"Food and Wine,\" and \"Saveur\". Her writing has been included in five editions of \"Best Food Writing\".\n\nIn her first book on wine, Grumdahl draws on her own experience to aid the reader into better understanding their own tastes and preferences as a guide to exploring the world of wine. The book presents nine parties to have at home to discover the reader's own taste when it comes to nine major varieties of wine including Zinfandel, Sauvignon blanc, Riesling, Chardonnay, Cabernet Sauvignon, Syrah, Sangiovese, Tempranillo, and Pinot noir. The book features some wine history and economics of the industry as well as interviews from such critics, winemakers, and chefs as Robert M. Parker, Jr., Paul Draper, and Thomas Keller. \"Drink This: Wine Made Simple\" was released on November 24, 2009 by Ballantine Books (an imprint of Random House).\n\nIn 2012, Grumdahl began a radio program—Off the Menu—on WCCO, the Minneapolis CBS radio station. The program broadcasts live on Saturday mornings and includes a mix of conversations with guests (Gabriel Rucker, Dominique Ansel, Nina Teicholz) and answers to listener questions. Grumdahl also appears weekly on WCCO on Chad Hartman and is an occasional guest on MPR.\n\nIn Minnesota, Grumdahl frequently emcees live events such as the Andrew Zimmern and Anthony Bourdain tour Guts & Glory , the Fran Lebowitz interview for Living Legends, the Mpls. St. Paul Magazine Tastemakers live series and the MPR Top Coast festival.\n"}
{"id": "19415443", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19415443", "title": "Start (cereal)", "text": "Start (cereal)\n\nStart (Multi-Grain Start) was a breakfast cereal which was produced by Kellogg's in the UK from the mid-1980s until 2018. Start was promoted as a cereal designed for improving sports performance. It was made from wheat, corn and oats and a single bowlful was said to provide a third of a human's daily vitamin RDA. It was suitable for vegetarians but not for wheat allergy sufferers. Start was discontinued in 2018 and replaced with the improved Honey Flavour Cars 3 Cereal.\n\nVitamins and minerals:\n\nThe cereal has had a number of different advertising campaigns, with its most notable promoter being British athlete Steve Cram in the mid-1980s, with the slogan \"I Want, Now I Can\". Several also featured British Tour de France rider Robert Millar.\n\n"}
{"id": "19422751", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19422751", "title": "Behind-armor debris", "text": "Behind-armor debris\n\nBehind-armor debris is debris particles eroded from the penetrator of armor as well as spalled material ejected from the target itself. \n\nBehind-armor debris characteristics can be described by the number, position, and size range of debris particles.\n"}
{"id": "19471586", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19471586", "title": "Positive affectivity", "text": "Positive affectivity\n\nPositive affectivity (PA) is a human characteristic that describes how much people experience positive affects (sensations, emotions, sentiments...); and as a consequence how they interact with others and with their surroundings.\n\nPeople with high positive affectivity are typically enthusiastic, energetic, confident, active, and alert. Research has linked positive affectivity with an increase in longevity, better sleep, and a decrease in stress hormones. People with a high positive affectivity have healthier coping styles, more positive self-qualities, and are more goal oriented. Positive affectivity also promotes an open-minded attitude, sociability, and helpfulness.\n\nThose having low levels of positive affectivity (and high levels of \"negative\" affectivity) are characterized by sadness, lethargy, distress, and un-pleasurable engagement (see negative affectivity). Low levels of positive affect are correlated with social anxiety and depression, due to decreased levels of dopamine.\n\nStudies are finding there is a relationship between dopamine release and positive affect in cognitive abilities. For instance, when dopamine levels are low, positive affect can stimulate the release of more dopamine, temporarily increasing cognitive, motor, and emotional processing. Stimulating dopamine release influences several cognitive functions. First, an increase in dopamine in the nigrostriatal system can temporarily relieve motor or cognitive dysfunction, due to Parkinson’s.\n\nAn increase in dopamine release also influences the mesocorticolimbic system, via VTA cells, increasing mood and open mindedness in older adults. Positive affect also stimulates dopamine production in the prefrontal cortex and the anterior cingulate facilities, which help with processing working memory and executive attention. Lastly, PA indirectly improves memory consolidation in the hippocampus, by increasing acetylcholine release from an increase in dopamine.\n\nOverall, positive affect results in a more positive outlook, increases problem solving skills, increases social skills, increases activity and projects, and can play a role in motor function.\n\nPositive affectivity (PA) and negative affectivity (NA) are nearly independent of each other; it is possible for a person to be high in both PA and NA, high in one and low in the other, or low in both. Affectivity has been found to be moderately stable over time and across situations (such as working versus relaxing). Positive affectivity may influence an individual's choices in general, particularly their responses to questionnaires.\n\nHappiness, a feeling of well-being, and high levels of self-esteem are often associated with high levels of positive affectivity, but they are each influenced by negative affectivity as well. Trait PA roughly corresponds to the dominant personality factors of extraversion; however, this construct is also influenced by interpersonal components.\n\nBecause there is not a hard-and-fast rule for defining certain levels of positive affectivity, different self-reported assessments use different scales of measure. Several prominent tests are listed below; in each of these, the respondent determines the degree to which a given adjective or phrase accurately characterizes him or her.\n\n\nPositive affectivity is a managerial and organizational behavior tool used to create positive environments in the workplace. Through the use of PA, the manager can induce a positive employee experience and culture. \"Since affectivity is related to the employee experiences, we expect the employees with high PA to feel considerable organizational support. Their optimism and confidence also helps them discuss their views in a manner characterized by constructive controversy with their supervisor, so that problems are solved and their positive feelings confirmed\". Positive Affectivity allows creative problem solving to flourish in an environment where employees are not intimidated to approach managers, therefore employees believe they are playing a key role in the organization in coming forward with solutions. The goal is to maximize PA and minimize any negative affectivity circulating in the business. Negative emotions, such as fear, anger, stress, hostility, sadness, and guilt, increase the predictability of workplace deviance, and therefore reduce the productivity of the business.\n\nPositive affectivity is an integral part of everyday life. PA helps individuals to process emotional information accurately and efficiently, to solve problems, to make plans, and to earn achievements. The broaden-and-build theory of PA suggests that PA broadens people's momentary thought-action repertoires and builds their enduring personal resources.\n\nResearch shows that PA relates to different classes of variables, such as social activity and the frequency of pleasant events. PA also strongly relates to life satisfaction. The high energy and engagement, optimism, and social interest characteristic of high-PA individuals suggest that they are more likely to be satisfied with their lives. In fact, the content similarities between these affective traits and life satisfaction have led some researchers to view both PA, NA, and life satisfaction as specific indicators of the broader construct of subjective well-being.\n\nPA may influence the relationships between variables in organizational research. PA increases attentional focus and behavioral repertoire, and these enhanced personal resources can help to overcome or deal with distressing situations. These resources are physical (e.g., better health), social (e.g., social support networks), and intellectual and psychological (e.g., resilience, optimism, and creativity).\n\nPA provides a psychological break or respite from stress, supporting continued efforts to replenish resources depleted by stress. Its buffering functions provide a useful antidote to the problems associated with negative emotions and ill health due to stress. Likewise, happy people are better at coping. McCrae and Costa concluded that PA was associated with more mature coping efforts.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "19484255", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19484255", "title": "Don Julio", "text": "Don Julio\n\nDon Julio is a brand of tequila produced in Mexico. It is the largest brand in value and eighth largest in volume. It is distilled, manufactured, bottled, sold, and distributed by Tequila Don Julio, S.A. de C.V. from its corporate facility in the Colonia El Chichimeco district, in the city of Atotonilco El Alto, Jalisco, Mexico. It is distributed in the United States by Diageo, under licensing from its patent holder, Tequila Don Julio, \"Sociedad Anónima de Capital Variable\", Jalisco, Mexico, but it is sold worldwide.\n\nDon Julio Tequila is named after its founder, Don Julio González-Frausto Estrada, who began distilling tequila in 1942 at age 17. Acknowledging the benefits of vertical integration, Gonzalez-Frausto established his own distillery, La Primavera, and spent the next 40 years improving his craft. He experimented with controlling various aspects of the tequila-making process, \"from the cultivation of the agave to the bottling of the final product\". He named his distillery \"La Primavera\" (the Springtime) where he produced his first brand Tres Magueyes. He is said to have \"spent nearly forty years perfecting the craft.\" Don Julio's first tequilas were shared with friends only, but as word on the quality of his tequila spread, he officially founded a company to put him in business. In 1983, Marco Cedano returned to Don Julio to work as an engineer, where he served as Master Distiller and Distillery Manager of Tequila.In 1985 Don Julio González-Frausto celebrated his 60th Birthday, his sons commemorated the date by creating a Tequila in his name, Don Julio. Following the sheer popularity of the tequila in Guadalajara and neighboring cities they decided to launch the tequila. It launched in 1987 and set the standard for all Tequilas in this category style. It is considered to be the world's first Luxury Tequila. Prior to this, tequila had been considered a \"farmers\" drink. Nobody would pay more than $30 for a bottle of well made tequila.\n\nIn 1999 the now defunct, The Seagram Company Ltd., had invested in Tequila Don Julio, S.A. de C.V. of Mexico. The expanded agave plantations were a joint venture between the Gonzalez-Frausto, Funtanet, Andrade Rivera Torres, and Cuaik families. In 1999 Don Julio Gonzalez, delighted to forge a relationship with Seagram, stated, \"I am proud that the Gonzalez-Frausto family joins with the Seagram family in a global effort behind Don Julio Tequila. I am committed to overseeing personally the agave plantations that are so vital to the superior and unique quality of the Tequila that bears my name.\" Diageo signed a joint venture in with Casa Cuervo in 2003, selling a 50 per cent stake in Don Julio for $100 million.\n\nIn November 2014, Diageo agreed to a deal to take full control of the Don Julio brand. In exchange, Jose Cuervo will receive the Old Bushmills Distillery and pay Diageo $408m.\n\nDon Julio Gonzalez-Frausto Estrada was born on the 7th of January 1925 in Atotonilco, Jalisco, where today’s main facility is located. Don Julio learned the meaning of responsibility at an early age by working at his uncle's José tequila distillery. At the age of 15 years Don Julio lost his father, and became the head of his household. With the task of supporting his family he got a job as a farmhand where he received nine pesos a week. After acknowledging his income was insufficient he persisted and started to sell tequila in small wooden barrels throughout Ocotlán, Jalisco. After this he earned the same nine pesos, but every day. At the age of 23 he married Dorothea Garcia with whom he had 9 children. In 1942 he started a tequila distillery which would later be known as \"La Primavera.\" By 1951, with the brand Tres Magueyes, he was on a path that would later become Tequila Don Julio in its different variants: Blanco, Reposado, Añejo, 70, 1942 and Real. Don Julio González-Frausto Estrada died on Tuesday, March 20, 2012 from natural causes.\n\nThe agave for Don Julio's Tequila is grown in the highland area of Atotonilco on leased land. The leasing arrangement gives Don JuIio the flexibility to move to different locations and rotate the crop. Tequila's major aging process over time takes place in conjuntion with the development of agave plants, given that they take seven years to reach maturity. Every agave plant is harvested by hand. The agave plant is cut from its roots and then the spearlike leaves are sheered off. The core that is left is called a piña, which is the raw material used for the making of tequila. The piñas are transported on a truck to Don Julio's Distillery where they are cut into equal sized pieces so that they bake evenly. The piñas are loaded into brick ovens where they are slowly baked over the course of several days. Then the baked piñas are crushed and doused with water, which releases the sweet agave syrup called agave juice. Then yeast is added to the agave water and is left to ferment. After the fermentation process is complete it results is a sweet, slight alcoholic agave beer which is then put into stills where it is distilled to become tequila. At last it is put into stainless steel tanks before bottling, or ex-bourbon casks for aging.\n\n\nSeveral of these offerings have performed well at international spirit ratings competitions. For example, Don Julio's Real tequila was awarded double gold medals at the 2008 and 2011 San Francisco World Spirits Competition and a silver medal at the 2012 competition.\n\n"}
{"id": "19484764", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19484764", "title": "Plugușorul", "text": "Plugușorul\n\nPlugușorul (\"Plowing is symbolic\", ) is a Moldovan and Romanian New Year's tradition and carol.\n\n\"\" literally means \"little plough\" in Romanian, \"-ul\" being enclitic definite article.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "19514632", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19514632", "title": "Better than sex cake", "text": "Better than sex cake\n\nBetter than sex cake, also known as Is It Really Better Than Sex? Cake, Better than Robert Redford cake, or even Better than Best Cake is a cake consisting of a chocolate cake mix, of the maker's choosing, a moist center, and whipped cream covering the exterior. Some versions of the recipe are very similar to an upside-down cake. The cake's origins are unknown and recipes exist from the 1980s, but the recipe received a surge in popularity after Paula Deen featured the dessert on her series \"Paula's Home Cooking\".\n\nThe cake's moist center is typically created by inserting a fork into the cake several times and filling the holes with a mixture containing sugar and a flavoring or fruit such as pineapple. It is traditionally baked using a 13 by 9 by 2-inch pan and then refrigerated and eaten cold. The basic recipe for the cake has been altered depending on the tastes of the person making the cake and alternates include vanilla, banana, or candy flavors.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "19540773", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19540773", "title": "Macon (food)", "text": "Macon (food)\n\nMacon is a cured and smoked form of mutton. Macon is prepared in a similar manner to bacon, with the meat being either dry cured with large quantities of salt or wet cured with brine and then smoked. The name macon is a portmanteau word of mutton and bacon. In South Africa the term is also used for other bacon substitutes, including ones made from beef.\n\nGenerally macon has a light black and yellow color, with the outer edges being a darker pink. Macon looks and feels similar to bacon. It would more commonly be found in a thin sliced form used in sandwiches, or as a smaller cut slice topping on a pizza.\n\nIt is also used as a bacon substitute for religious groups such as Jews and Muslims, whose faith does not allow the consumption of pork.\n\nLocal macon production has been practiced for centuries in Scotland. It was mass produced in the United Kingdom during World War II when rationing was instituted. Scottish lawyer and politician Frederick Alexander Macquisten, was the first to suggest mass production of macon. \"If the Parliamentary Secretary to the Minister of Food will consult with any farmer's wife in Perthshire, she will show him how to cure it,\" he informed the House of Commons. This led to its popular name \"Macon's bacon\".\n\n"}
{"id": "19543616", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19543616", "title": "Chicken paprikash", "text": "Chicken paprikash\n\nChicken paprikas ( or \"csirkepaprikás\") or paprika chicken is a popular dish of Hungarian origin and one of the most famous variations on the \"paprikas\" preparations common to Hungarian tables. The name is derived from the ample use of paprika, a spice commonly used in Hungarian cuisine. The meat is typically simmered for an extended period in a sauce that begins with a paprika-infused roux.\n\nThe \"édes nemes\" (sweet paprika) is the preferred kind of paprika; it adds a rosy color as well as flavor. Sometimes olive oil and sweet red or yellow peppers and a small amount of tomato paste are used. The dish bears a \"family resemblance\" to goulash, another paprika dish.\n\nThe dish is traditionally served with \"dumpling-like boiled egg noodles\" (nokedli), a broad noodle similar to the German spätzle. Other side dishes that it may be served with include tagliatelle (boiled ribbon noodles), rice or millet.\n\nFood columnist Iles Brody's recipe called for chicken, onions, butter or lard, sweet paprika, green peppers, tomatoes, clove garlic, flour, and sour cream. Other recipes are similar. While quartered chicken parts are more traditional, modern interpretations of the recipe may call for boneless, skinless chicken thighs.\n\nA version of paprikash (паприкаш) exists in the Bulgarian cuisine, however it includes smaller amounts of paprika being added to the sautéed onion in the beginning of the cooking and then adding cubed, usually green, sweet peppers. The dish is centered on the latter.\n\nIn Bram Stoker's 1897 novel \"Dracula\", Jonathan Harker dines on chicken paprikash during his journey through the Carpathian Mountains to Dracula's castle.\n\n"}
{"id": "19558531", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19558531", "title": "Sorbetes", "text": "Sorbetes\n\nSorbetes is the traditional variation of ice cream made in the Philippines. It is distinct from the similarly named sorbet. Peddled by street hawkers, it is usually served with small wafer or sugar cones and more recently, bread buns. It is uniquely made from either coconut milk or ordinary milk.\n\nIce cream was introduced in the Philippines during the American Occupation when refrigerators and other cooling devices were introduced. While American ice cream was made with cow's milk, using the milk of the carabao, a kind of water buffalo, resulted in a cheaper product which became known as \"sorbetes\". Both kinds of milk are widely used today. Coconut milk and cassava flour are two other ingredients used that make sorbetes distinct from ice cream made in other countries. Flavors also varied from the usual natural fruits such as mango, avocado, melon, jackfruit, coconut and strawberry to flavors imitating commercial ice cream such as chocolate, cookies and cream, cheese, mocha, ube, etc.\n\nThe sorbetes industry competes with commercially available ice cream from giant companies operating in the Philippines such as Arce Dairy, Esmerald, Darchelle, Magnolia, Nestlé, and Selecta, which also started peddling their product in the streets in more sanitized carts.\n\nSorbetes is peddled by sorbeteros using colorfully painted wooden carts which usually can accommodate three flavors, each in a large metal canister. Peddlers get their carts from makers scattered around the cities of the Philippines in the morning and walk the streets the whole day, calling consumers from their houses by ringing a small handheld bell.\n\nThe wooden cart has two large wooden wheels at the front part to easily push the cart though latest carts are already attached to bicycles.\n\nThe cart is stuffed with shaved ice sprinkled with salt to produce a lower temperature around the metal canisters and keep the sorbetes frozen longer.\n\nThe whole sorbetes cart is also available for private gatherings when negotiated with the sorbetero. It is usually cheaper than buying gallons of ice cream to be served to guests.\n\nPeddlers of sorbetes provide several serving options. It may be served in a small plastic cup, a wafer cone, a sugar cone or a bread bun, at varying prices. A serving can include one flavor or, for no extra charge, a mixture of available flavors.\n\nSorbetes is usually consumed as a snack while travelling. It can also be served as dessert.\n\n"}
{"id": "19593996", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19593996", "title": "Lava lamp", "text": "Lava lamp\n\nA lava lamp (or astro lamp) is a decorative lamp, invented in 1963 by British entrepreneur Edward Craven Walker the founder of the British lighting company Mathmos. The lamp consists of a bolus of a special coloured wax mixture inside a glass vessel, the remainder of which contains clear or translucent liquid; the vessel is then placed on a box containing an incandescent light bulb whose heat causes temporary reductions in the density of the wax and surface tension of the liquid. The warmed wax rises through the surrounding liquid, cools, loses its buoyancy, and falls back to the bottom of the vessel in a cycle that is visually suggestive of pāhoehoe lava, hence the name. The lamps are designed in a variety of styles and colours.\n\nA classic lava lamp contains a standard incandescent or halogen lamp which heats a tall (often tapered) glass bottle. A formula from 1968 US patent consisted of water and a transparent, translucent, or opaque mix of mineral oil, paraffin wax, and carbon tetrachloride. The clear water or mineral oil can optionally be coloured with transparent dyes.\n\nCommon wax has a density much lower than that of water, and would float on top under any temperature. However, carbon tetrachloride is heavier than water (also nonflammable and miscible with wax) and is added to the wax to make its density at room temperature slightly higher than that of the water. When heated, the wax mixture becomes less dense than the water, because the wax expands more than water when both are heated. It also becomes fluid, and blobs of wax ascend to the top of the device where they cool (which increases their density relative to that of the water) and then they descend. A metallic wire coil in the base of the bottle acts as a surface tension breaker to recombine the cooled blobs of wax after they descend.\nHowever, lava lamps made in China for the US market since 1970 do not use carbon tetrachloride, because its use was banned that year due to toxicity. The manufacturer (Haggerty) stated that their current formulation is a trade secret.\n\nThe underlying fluid mechanics phenomenon is a form of Rayleigh–Taylor instability.\n\nThe bulb is normally 25 to 40 watts. Generally, it will take 45–60 minutes for the wax to warm up enough to form freely rising blobs, when operating the lamp at standard room temperature. It may take as long as 2 to 3 hours if the room is below standard room temperature.\n\nOnce the wax is molten, the lamp should not be shaken or knocked over or the two fluids may emulsify, and the fluid surrounding the wax blobs will remain cloudy rather than clear. Some recombination will occur as part of the normal cycle of the wax in the container, but the only means to recombine all of the wax is to turn off the lamp and wait a few hours. The wax will settle back down at the bottom, forming one blob once again. Severe cases can require many heat-cool cycles to clear.\n\nIn 2015, a new design was introduced into the market that uses ferrofluid in place of wax.\n\nBritish entrepreneur Edward Craven-Walker had the idea for the lava lamp in 1963 after watching a homemade egg timer, which was made from a cocktail shaker filled with liquids, as it was bubbling on a stove top in a pub. He hired British inventor David George Smith to develop the device and the chemical formula required put his idea into practice. Smith is credited as the inventor on the original for a \"Display Device\", that was filed and assigned to Craven-Walker's company in 1965, and subsequently issued in 1968. Craven-Walker's company was named Crestworth and was based in Poole, Dorset, in the United Kingdom. Craven-Walker named the lamp \"Astro\" and had variations such as the \"Astro Mini\" and the \"Astro Coach\" lantern.\n\nIn 1965, two men named Adolph Wertheimer and Hy Spector were intrigued by Walker’s product when they saw it at a German trade show. They bought the American rights and began the Lava Manufacturing Corporation in Chicago, Illinois to sell what they called the Lava Lite Lamp. In the late 1970s, the US rights were sold to Larry Haggerty, who created a subsidiary of his company, Haggerty Enterprises, called Lava World International, which produced American lava lamps for over 30 years.\n\nCraven-Walker retained the rights for the rest of the world, and took on two business partners in the late 1980s named Cressida Granger and David Mulley. Eventually Granger and Mulley took over the company and they changed the name to Mathmos in 1992. Edward Craven-Walker remained a consultant until his death in 2000. Mathmos continues to make Lava Lamps and related products. Mathmos won two Queens Awards for Export, as well as Best Multi-Media prize at the Design Week awards. Astro lava lamp was launched in 1963 and celebrated its 50th anniversary in 2013. Mathmos lava lamps are still made in the original factory in Poole, Dorset.\n\nIn 2003, American lava lamp maker, Lava World International (formerly known as Lava-Simplex-Scribe Internationale), shipped production to China. In 2008, they were acquired by Talon Merchant Capital and the name was again changed to Lava Lite LLC. As of 2016, lava lamps were being sold under Lifespan brands in North America. In 2018, the 'Lava Lamp' brand was acquired by toy and gift maker, Schylling Inc. of North Andover, MA. \n\n\n"}
{"id": "19599346", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19599346", "title": "Frühschoppen", "text": "Frühschoppen\n\nFrühschoppen (pronounced , meaning: an alcoholic drink before midday in company) is the German and Austrian tradition of meeting up at a pub, inn or tavern in the late morning, usually on Sundays. The specific customs vary from region to region. \"Frühschoppen\" is often a kind of brunch, but does not necessarily involve food. Frühschoppen is also often held at fun fairs, the most famous being Oktoberfest or Cannstatter Volksfest.\n\nIn Lower Bavaria and most of Upper Bavaria, \"Frühschoppen\" is understood to be a specific kind of brunch consisting of Weisswurst, sweet mustard, pretzels, and Weissbier (an unfiltered wheat beer). The Bavarian \"Frühschoppen\" began in rural areas and has originally taken place on Sundays in a tavern at the regulars' table (\"Stammtisch\"). During \"Frühschoppen\", folk may discuss everyday life and politics. In the corner of the tavern or festival tent (\"Festzelt\") there is typically a band playing Volksmusik. (Nowadays some places have pop, rock, and jazz bands.)\n\nIn many other regions of Germany, \"Frühschoppen\" is understood more generally to be a gathering in a pub on Sunday morning, traditionally held after church service. This usually includes the consumption of alcoholic beverages, but not necessarily that of a meal. With the decline of church attendance in Germany this tradition has become somewhat less common, but is still held up in many places, especially in rural areas.\n\n"}
{"id": "19600187", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19600187", "title": "Anise of Flavigny", "text": "Anise of Flavigny\n\nAnise of Flavigny is a candy from Flavigny-sur-Ozerain in Burgundy.\n\nAnise candies were first made by the Benedictine monks of the abbey of Flavigny (founded in 719), as reported by the Roman traveller Flavius.\n\nAfter the French revolution, several confectioners began making this delicacy using the same recipe. Only one manufacturer remains today at the abbey, Maison Troubat, who claims to follow a recipe which has been in use since 1591.\n\nEach candy is made in a dragee process starting with a single anise seed: Over a period of 15 days it is covered with successive coats of flavored sugar syrup. The finished candy is always called \"Anis\" by its makers, even when the flavor is one of violet, rose, mint, jasmine, liquorice, or orange instead of anise.\n\n"}
{"id": "19610581", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19610581", "title": "Fernet-Branca", "text": "Fernet-Branca\n\nFernet-Branca is a brand of \"amaro\", or bitter herbal liqueur. Bernardino Branca invented the Fernet-Branca bitter in Milan, Italy, in 1845. The brand soon thereafter gained popularity, leading to the founding of the Fratelli Branca Distillery.\n\nIntensely bitter since its inception in 1845, Fernet-Branca has been produced according to the original recipe that has been handed down from generation to generation. The bitters are made from 27 herbs and other ingredients. The exact formula is a trade secret known only to the Fernet-Branca president, Niccolò Branca, who personally measures out the aromatics during the production process.\n\nThe same manufacturer also offers a sweeter, mint-flavored liqueur under the label \"Branca Menta\".\n\nAs a fernet, the beverage has a higher ABV (39%) and lower sugar content than most other amaros.\n\nFernet-Branca is often consumed neat as a digestif, typically served in a cordial glass, or as a mixing component (usually supportive and not as the primary ingredient) in cocktails such as the \"Toronto\", the \"Fanciulli\", and the more prolific \"Hanky Panky\".\n\nThe beverage was originally promoted for its health benefits including as a remedy for “overeating, flatulence, hangovers, gas pains, (and) lifting yourself off the floor when you’ve mixed oysters and bananas.”\n\nFernet-Branca has enjoyed a recent growth in popularity in the United States particularly due to an increase in the interest in mixing/serving of \"vintage\" cocktails.\n\nIn Argentina, Bolivia and Uruguay, \"Fernet con Coca\"—Fernet-Branca with Coca-Cola—is a popular refreshment.\n\nIn Finland, specially Lahti, \"2cl Fernet\" is a popular refreshment.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "19610998", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19610998", "title": "Table knife", "text": "Table knife\n\nA table knife is an item of cutlery with a single cutting edge, and a blunt end - part of a table setting. Table knives are typically of moderate sharpness only, designed to cut prepared and cooked food.\n\nThe distinguishing feature of a table knife is a blunt or rounded end. The origin of this, and thus of the table knife itself, is attributed by tradition to Cardinal Richelieu around 1637, reputedly to cure dinner guests of the habit of picking their teeth with their knife-points.\n\nLater, in 1669, King Louis XIV of France banned pointed knives in the street and at his table,\ninsisting on blunt tips, in the hope that it would reduce violence.\n\nIn any table setting, the knife will typically be the piece to bear the maker's stamp, on the blade. The English city of Sheffield is noted for its cutlery manufacture and many knives bear the city's name in addition to the maker's.\n\nIn the past the blades were typically of carbon steel, with handles of bone, wood or ivory, but many modern examples are now made from a single piece of stainless steel for both handle and blade as per the example pictured.\n\n"}
{"id": "19629315", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19629315", "title": "Bloody Mary (cocktail)", "text": "Bloody Mary (cocktail)\n\nA Bloody Mary is a cocktail containing vodka, tomato juice, and combinations of other spices and flavorings including Worcestershire sauce, hot sauces, garlic, herbs, horseradish, celery, olives, salt, black pepper, lemon juice, lime juice and/or celery salt. In the United States, it is usually consumed in the morning or early afternoon, and is popular as a hangover cure.\n\nThe Bloody Mary was invented in the 1920s or 1930s; there are various theories as to the origin of the drink, as well as the origin of its name. It has many variants, most notably the Red Snapper, the Virgin Mary, the Caesar, and the michelada.\n\nFernand Petiot claimed to have invented the Bloody Mary in 1921, well before any of the later claims, according to his grand-daughter. He was working at the New York Bar in Paris at the time, which later became Harry's New York Bar, a frequent Paris hangout for Ernest Hemingway and other American migrants. The original cocktail is said to have been created on the spur-of-the-moment, according to the bar's own traditions, consisting only of vodka and tomato juice. Harry's Bar also claims to have created numerous other classic cocktails, including the White Lady and the Side Car.\n\nNew York's 21 Club has two claims associated with it. One is that it was invented in the 1930s by a bartender named Henry Zbikiewicz, who was charged with mixing Bloody Marys. Another attributes its invention to the comedian George Jessel, who frequented the 21 Club. In 1939, Lucius Beebe printed in his gossip column \"This New York\" one of the earliest U.S. references to this drink, along with the original recipe: \"George Jessel's newest pick-me-up which is receiving attention from the town's paragraphers is called a Bloody Mary: half tomato juice, half vodka\". \n\nFernand Petiot later claimed to have invented the modern Bloody Mary in 1934 as a refinement to Jessel's drink, at the King Cole Room in New York's St. Regis Hotel, according to the hotel's own history. When Petiot spoke to \"The New Yorker\" magazine in July 1964, he said:\n\nThe cocktail was claimed as a new cocktail under the name \"Red Hammer\" in \"Life\" magazine in 1942, consisting of tomato juice, vodka, and lemon juice. Less than a month later in the same magazine, an advertisement for French's Worcestershire Sauce suggested that it be added to a virgin \"Tomato Juice Cocktail\" along with tomato juice, salt, and pepper. The addition of salt to the alcoholic beverage was suggested that same year in a story in \"Hearst's International Combined with Cosmopolitan\".\n\nThe name \"Bloody Mary\" is associated with a number of historical figures—particularly Queen Mary I of England, who was nicknamed as such in \"Foxe's Book of Martyrs\" for attempting to re-establish the Catholic Church in England—and fictional women from folklore.\n\nSome drink aficionados believe the inspiration for the name was Hollywood star Mary Pickford. Others trace the name to a waitress named Mary who worked at a Chicago bar called the \"Bucket of Blood\". The tradition at \"Harry's New York Bar\" in Paris, according to manager Alain Da Silva in a 2011 interview, is that one of the patrons for whom the cocktail was first mixed in 1920 or 1921 declared, \"It looks like my girlfriend who I met in a cabaret\"; the cabaret's name was the \"Bucket of Blood\" and the girlfriend's name was \"Mary\", so the patrons and bartender \"Pete\" Petiot agreed to call it a \"Bloody Mary\".\n\nYet another suggested origin of \"Bloody Mary\" is that the name in English simply arose from \"a failure to pronounce the Slav syllables of a drink called Vladimir\",\nwhich gains some credibility from the anecdotal observation that the customer at \"The New York Bar\" for whom Fernand Petiot prepared the drink in 1920/21 was Vladimir Smirnov, of the Smirnoff vodka family.\n\nIn the United States, the Bloody Mary is a common \"hair of the dog\" drink, reputed to cure hangovers with its combination of a heavy vegetable base (to settle the stomach), salt (to replenish lost electrolytes), and alcohol (to relieve head and body aches). Bloody Mary enthusiasts enjoy some relief from the numbing effects of the alcohol, as well as the placebo effect. Its reputation as a restorative beverage contributes to the popularity of the Bloody Mary in the morning and early afternoon, especially at brunches.\n\nThe drink is traditionally served over ice in a tall glass, such as a highball, flared pint or hurricane glass. The two critical ingredients, vodka and tomato juice, are relatively simple; however, the drink almost never consists of these two ingredients alone. Among the more common additions to the juice base are salt or celery salt (either mixed in or as a salted rim), cracked pepper, hot sauce (such as Tabasco), citrus juices (especially lemon or lime), Worcestershire sauce, celery seed, horseradish, clam juice or olive brine, brown sugar or molasses, and/or bitters. Some or all of these ingredients can come pre-mixed with the tomato juice as a single \"Bloody Mary mix\" to which the vodka is added, or the drink may be hand-constructed by the bartender from raw ingredients according to the patron's preference. A common garnish is a celery stalk when served in a tall glass; other common garnishes include olives, , a dill pickle spear, lemon wedges, dried sausage, and/or shrimp (as the taste of the drink is often reminiscent of shrimp cocktail sauce).\n\nThere is a considerable amount of variation available in the drink's construction and presentation including the use of different base spirits like bourbon, rye, tequila, or gin. Gin is often preferred in the UK, sometimes called a Red Snapper (although this name is also used for other variants), or Ruddy Mary. In addition to the aforementioned more traditional ingredients, practically anything can be added to the drink itself or as a garnish according to the drinker's wishes or the bartender's or establishment's traditions. Some variations of the Bloody Mary served by restaurants are designed to be a meal as well as a drink, coming with massive \"garnishes\" on skewers inserted into the glass, including ribs, miniature hamburgers called \"sliders\", grilled or fried shrimp, kebabs, sandwich wedges, fruit slices, and even sashimi. The drink itself can be served in any of a variety of glasses, from wine glasses to schooners or beer steins, according to tradition or availability. It is a tradition in the upper Midwest, particularly in Wisconsin, to serve a Bloody Mary with a small beer chaser.\n\nA Virgin Mary, also known as a \"Bloody Virgin\" or \"Bloody Shame\" (the latter especially in Australia) is a non-alcoholic cocktail, generally using the same ingredients and garnish as a Bloody Mary (according to local custom), but with the spirits replaced by additional tomato juice or prepared mix.\n\n"}
{"id": "19636775", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19636775", "title": "Maximum cut", "text": "Maximum cut\n\nFor a graph, a maximum cut is a cut whose size is at least the size of any other cut. The problem of finding a maximum cut in a graph is known as the Max-Cut Problem.\n\nThe problem can be stated simply as follows. One wants a subset \"S\" of the vertex set such that the number of edges between \"S\" and the complementary subset is as large as possible.\n\nThere is a more general version of the problem called weighted Max-Cut. In this version each edge has a real number, its weight, and the objective is to maximize not the number of edges but the total weight of the edges between \"S\" and its complement. The weighted Max-Cut problem is often, but not always, restricted to non-negative weights, because negative weights can change the nature of the problem.\n\nThe following decision problem related to maximum cuts has been studied widely in theoretical computer science:\n\nThis problem is known to be NP-complete. It is easy to see that the problem is in NP: a \"yes\" answer is easy to prove by presenting a large enough cut. The NP-completeness of the problem can be shown, for example, by a reduction from maximum 2-satisfiability (a restriction of the maximum satisfiability problem). The weighted version of the decision problem was one of Karp's 21 NP-complete problems; Karp showed the NP-completeness by a reduction from the partition problem.\n\nThe canonical optimization variant of the above decision problem is usually known as the \"Maximum-Cut Problem\" or \"Max-Cut\" and is defined as:\n\nAs the Max-Cut Problem is NP-hard, no polynomial-time algorithms for Max-Cut in general graphs are known.\n\nHowever, in planar graphs, the Maximum-Cut Problem is dual to the route inspection problem (the problem of finding a shortest tour that visits each edge of a graph at least once), in the sense that the edges that do not belong to a maximum cut-set of a graph \"G\" are the duals of the edges that are doubled in an optimal inspection tour of the dual graph of \"G\". The optimal inspection tour forms a self-intersecting curve that separates the plane into two subsets, the subset of points for which the winding number of the curve is even and the subset for which the winding number is odd; these two subsets form a cut that includes all of the edges whose duals appear an odd number of times in the tour. The route inspection problem may be solved in polynomial time, and this duality allows the maximum cut problem to also be solved in polynomial time for planar graphs. The Maximum-Bisection problem is known however to be NP-hard.\n\nThe Max-Cut Problem is APX-hard, meaning that there is no polynomial-time approximation scheme (PTAS), arbitrarily close to the optimal solution, for it, unless P = NP. Thus, every known polynomial-time approximation algorithm achieves an approximation ratio strictly less than one.\n\nThere is a simple randomized 0.5-approximation algorithm: for each vertex flip a coin to decide to which half of the partition to assign it. In expectation, half of the edges are cut edges. This algorithm can be derandomized with the method of conditional probabilities; therefore there is a simple deterministic polynomial-time 0.5-approximation algorithm as well. One such algorithm starts with an arbitrary partition of the vertices of the given graph formula_1 and repeatedly moves one vertex at a time from one side of the partition to the other, improving the solution at each step, until no more improvements of this type can be made. The number of iterations is at most formula_2 because the algorithm improves the cut by at least one edge at each step. When the algorithm terminates, at least half of the edges incident to every vertex belong to the cut, for otherwise moving the vertex would improve the cut. Therefore, the cut includes at least formula_3 edges.\n\nThe polynomial-time approximation algorithm for Max-Cut with the best known approximation ratio is a method by Goemans and Williamson using semidefinite programming and randomized rounding that achieves an approximation ratio formula_4, where formula_5. If the unique games conjecture is true, this is the best possible approximation ratio for maximum cut.\nWithout such unproven assumptions, it has been proven to be NP-hard to approximate the max-cut value with an approximation ratio better than formula_6.\n\nIn there is an extended analysis of 10 heuristics for this problem, including open-source implementation.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "19651298", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19651298", "title": "Soup", "text": "Soup\n\nSoup is a primarily liquid food, generally served warm or hot (but may be cool or cold), that is made by combining ingredients of meat or vegetables with stock, or water. Hot soups are additionally characterized by boiling solid ingredients in liquids in a pot until the flavors are extracted, forming a broth.\n\nIn traditional French cuisine, soups are classified into two main groups: \"clear soups\" and \"thick soups\". The established French classifications of clear soups are \"bouillon\" and \"consommé\". Thick soups are classified depending upon the type of thickening agent used: \"purées\" are vegetable soups thickened with starch; \"bisques\" are made from puréed shellfish or vegetables thickened with \"cream\"; cream soups may be thickened with béchamel sauce; and \"veloutés\" are thickened with eggs, butter, and cream. Other ingredients commonly used to thicken soups and broths include egg, rice, lentils, flour, and grains; many popular soups also include pumpkin, carrots, and potatoes.\n\nSoups are similar to stews, and in some cases there may not be a clear distinction between the two; however, soups generally have more liquid (broth) than stews.\n\nEvidence of the existence of soup can be found as far back as about 20,000 BC. Boiling was not a common cooking technique until the invention of waterproof containers (which probably came in the form of clay vessels). Animal hides and watertight baskets of bark or reeds were used before this. To boil the water hot rocks were used. This method was also used to cook acorns and other plants.\n\nThe word \"soup\" comes from French \"soupe\" (\"soup\", \"broth\"), which comes through Vulgar Latin \"suppa\" (\"bread soaked in broth\") from a Germanic source, from which also comes the word \"sop\", a piece of bread used to soak up soup or a thick stew.\n\nThe word \"restaurant\" (meaning \"[something] restoring\") was first used in France in the 16th century, to refer to a highly concentrated, inexpensive soup, sold by street vendors, that was advertised as an antidote to physical exhaustion. In 1765, a Parisian entrepreneur opened a shop specializing in such soups. This prompted the use of the modern word \"restaurant\" for the eating establishments.\n\nIn the US, the first colonial cookbook was published by William Parks in Williamsburg, Virginia, in 1742, based on Eliza Smith's \"The Compleat Housewife; or Accomplished Gentlewoman's Companion\", and it included several recipes for soups and bisques. A 1772 cookbook, \"The Frugal Housewife\", contained an entire chapter on the topic. English cooking dominated early colonial cooking; but as new immigrants arrived from other countries, other national soups gained popularity. In particular, German immigrants living in Pennsylvania were famous for their potato soups. In 1794, Jean Baptiste Gilbert Payplat dis Julien, a refugee from the French Revolution, opened an eating establishment in Boston called \"The Restorator\", and became known as the \"Prince of Soups\". The first American cooking pamphlet dedicated to soup recipes was written in 1882 by Emma Ewing: \"Soups and Soup Making\".\n\nPortable soup was devised in the 18th century by boiling seasoned meat until a thick, resinous syrup was left that could be dried and stored for months at a time.\n\nCommercial soup became popular with the invention of canning in the 19th century, and today a great variety of canned and dried soups are on the market.\n\nCanned soup (condensed with liquid added, also called \"ready-to-eat\") can be prepared by simply heating in a pan, rather than actually cooking anything. It can be made on the stovetop or in the microwave. Such soups can be used as a base for homemade soups, with the consumer adding anything from a few vegetables to eggs, meat, cream or pasta.\nDoctor John T. Dorrance, a chemist with the Campbell Soup Company, invented condensed soup in 1897. Canned soup can be condensed, in which case it is prepared by adding water (or sometimes milk), or it can be \"ready-to-eat\", meaning that no additional liquid is needed before eating. Condensing soup allows soup to be packaged into a smaller can and sold at a lower price than other canned soups. The soup is usually doubled in volume by adding a \"can full\" of water or milk, about .\n\nSince the 1990s, the canned soup market has burgeoned, with non-condensed soups marketed as \"ready-to-eat\", so they require no additional liquid to prepare. Microwaveable bowls have expanded the \"ready-to-eat\" canned soup market even more, offering convenience (especially in workplaces), and making for popular lunch items. In response to concerns over the negative health effects of excessive salt intake, some soup manufacturers have introduced reduced-salt versions of popular soups.\n\nToday, Campbell's Tomato (introduced in 1897), Cream of Mushroom, and Chicken Noodle (introduced in 1934) are three of the most popular soups in America. Americans consume approximately 2.5 billion bowls of these three soups alone each year. Other popular brands of soup include Progresso.\n\nDry soup mixes are sold by many manufacturers, and are reconstituted with hot water; other fresh ingredients may then be added.\n\nThe first dried soup was bouillon cubes; the earlier meat extract did not require refrigeration, but was a viscous liquid.\n\nEast Asian-style instant noodle soups include ramen and seasonings, and are marketed as a convenient and inexpensive instant meal, requiring only hot water for preparation.\n\nWestern-style dried soups include vegetable, chicken base, potato, pasta and cheese flavors.\n\nIn French cuisine, soup is often served before other dishes in a meal. In 1970, Richard Olney gave the place of the entrée in a French full menu: \"A dinner that begins with a soup and runs through a fish course, an entrée, a sorbet, a roast, salad, cheese and dessert, and that may be accompanied by from three to six wines, presents a special problem of orchestration\".\n\n\nFruit soups are prepared using fruit as a primary ingredient, and may be served warm or cold depending on the recipe. Many varieties of fruit soups exist, and they may be prepared based upon the availability of seasonal fruit.\n\nCold soups are a particular variation on the traditional soup, wherein the temperature when served is kept at or below room temperature. They may be sweet or savory. In summer, sweet cold soups can form part of a dessert tray. An example of a savory chilled soup is \"gazpacho\", a chilled vegetable-based soup originating from Spain.\n\nA feature of East Asian soups not normally found in Western cuisine is the use of tofu in soups. Many traditional East Asian soups are typically broths, \"clear soups\", or starch thickened soups.\n\n\n\n\nIn the English language, the word \"soup\" has developed several uses in phrase.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "19653966", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19653966", "title": "Spawn (biology)", "text": "Spawn (biology)\n\nSpawn is the eggs and sperm released or deposited into water by aquatic animals. As a verb, \"to spawn\" refers to the process of releasing the eggs and sperm, and the act of both sexes is called spawning. Most aquatic animals, except for aquatic mammals and reptiles, reproduce through the process of spawning.\n\nSpawn consists of the reproductive cells (gametes) of many aquatic animals, some of which will become fertilized and produce offspring. The process of spawning typically involves females releasing ova (unfertilized eggs) into the water, often in large quantities, while males simultaneously or sequentially release spermatozoa (milt) to fertilize the eggs.\n\nMost fish reproduce by spawning, as do most other aquatic animals, including crustaceans such as crabs and shrimps, molluscs such as oysters and squid, echinoderms such as sea urchins and sea cucumbers, amphibians such as frogs and newts, aquatic insects such as mayflies and mosquitoes and corals, which are actually small aquatic animals—not plants. Fungi, such as mushrooms, are also said to \"spawn\" a white, fibrous matter that forms the matrix from which they grow.\n\nThere are many variations in the way spawning occurs, depending on sexual differences in anatomy, how the sexes relate to each other, where and how the spawn is released and whether or how the spawn is subsequently guarded.\n\nMarine animals, and particularly bony fish, commonly reproduce by \"broadcast spawning\". This is an external method of reproduction where the female releases many unfertilised eggs into the water. At the same time, a male or many males release a lot of sperm into the water which fertilises some of these eggs. The eggs contain a drop of nutrient oil to sustain the embryo as it develops inside the egg case. The oil also provides buoyancy, so the eggs float and drift with the current. The strategy for survival of broadcast spawning is to disperse the fertilised eggs, preferably away from the coast into the relative safety of the open ocean. There the larvae develop as they consume their fat stores, and eventually hatch from the egg capsule into miniature versions of their parents.\nTo survive, they must then become miniature predators themselves, feeding on plankton. Fish eventually encounter others of their own kind (conspecifics), where they form aggregations and learn to school.\n\nInternally, the sexes of most marine animals can be determined by looking at the gonads. For example, male testes of spawning fish are smooth and white and account for up to 12% of the mass of the fish, while female ovaries are granular and orange or yellow, accounting for up to 70% of the fish's mass. Male lampreys, hagfish and salmon discharge their sperm into the body cavity where it is expelled through pores in the abdomen. Male sharks and rays can pass sperm along a duct into a seminal vesicle, where they store it for a while before it is expelled, while teleosts usually employ separate sperm ducts.\n\nExternally, many marine animals, even when spawning, show little sexual dimorphism (difference in body shape or size) or little difference in colouration. Where species are dimorphic, such as sharks or guppies, the males often have penis-like intromittent organs in the form of a modified fin.\n\nA species is semelparous if its individuals spawn only once in their lifetime, and iteroparous if its individuals spawn more than once. The term semelparity comes from the Latin \"semel\", once, and \"pario\", to beget, while iteroparity comes from \"itero\", to repeat, and \"pario\", to beget.\n\nSemelparity is sometimes called \"big bang\" reproduction, since the single reproductive event of semelparous organisms is usually large and fatal to the spawners. The classic example of a semelparous animal is the Pacific salmon,which lives for many years in the ocean before swimming to the freshwater stream of its birth, spawning, and then dying. Other spawning animals which are semelparous include mayflies, squid, octopus, smelt, capelin and some amphibians. Semelparity is often associated with r-strategists. However, most fish and other spawning animals are iteroparous.\n\nWhen the internal ovaries or egg masses of fish and certain marine animals are ripe for spawning they are called roe. Roe from certain species, such as shrimp, scallop, crab and sea urchins, are sought as human delicacies in many parts of the world. \"Caviar\" is a name for the processed, salted roe of non-fertilized sturgeon. The term \"soft roe\" or \"white roe\" denotes fish milt. Lobster roe is called \"coral\" because it turns bright red when cooked. Roe (reproductive organs) are usually eaten either raw or briefly cooked.\n\n\"The reproductive behaviour of fishes is remarkably diversified: they may be oviparous (lay eggs), ovoviparous (retain the eggs in the body until they hatch), or viviparous (have a direct tissue connection with the developing embryos and give birth to live young). All cartilaginous fishes—the elasmobranches (e.g., sharks, rays, and skates)—employ internal fertilization and usually lay large, heavy-shelled eggs or give birth to live young. The most characteristic features of the more primitive bony fishes is the assemblage of polyandrous (many males) breeding aggregations in open water and the absence of parental care...\"\n\nThere are two main reproduction methods in fish. The first method is by laying eggs and the second by \"live-bearing\" (producing their young alive).\n\n\nMonogamy occurs when one male mates with one female exclusively. This is also called \"pair spawning\". Most fish are not monogamous, and when they are, they often alternate with non-monogamous behaviours. Monogamy can occur when feeding and breeding grounds are small, when it is difficult for fish to find partners, or when both sexes look after the young. Many tropical cichlids, which rear their young together in locations where they must fiercely defend against competitors and predators are monogamous. \"In some pipefishes and seahorses, development of eggs takes a long time before the female can place them in the brood pouch of a male, where they are fertilized. While the male is pregnant, the female starts a new batch of eggs, which are ready at about the same time that the male gives birth to the young from the previous mating. This close timing of development promotes monogamy, especially if the likelihood of encountering another potential mate is low.\"\n\nPolygyny occurs when one male gets exclusive mating rights with multiple females. In polygyny a large conspicuous male usually defends females from other males or defends a breeding site. The females choose large males that are successfully defending prime breeding sites which the females find attractive. For example, sculpin males defend \"caves\" underneath rocks which are suitable for the incubation of embryos.\n\nAnother way males get to mate with several females is through the use of leks. Leks are places where many fish come together, and the males display to each another. Based on these displays, each female then selects the male they want to be their mate. For example, among the cichlid \"Cyrtocara eucinostomus\" in Lake Malawi, up to 50,000 large and colourful males display together on a lek four kilometres long. The females, which are mouth brooders, choose which male they want to fertilize their eggs.\n\nPolyandry occurs when one female gets exclusive mating rights with multiple males. This happens among fish like clownfish that change their sex. It can also happen when males do the brooding but can cannot handle all the eggs the female produce, such as with some pipefish.\n\nThe males in some deep sea anglerfishes are much smaller than the females. When they find a female they bite into her skin, releasing an enzyme that digests the skin of their mouth and her body and fusing the pair down to the blood-vessel level. The male then slowly atrophies, losing first his digestive organs, then his brain, heart, and eyes, ending as nothing more than a pair of gonads, which release sperm in response to hormones in the female's bloodstream indicating egg release. This ensures that, when the female is ready to spawn, she has a mate immediately available. A single anglerfish female can \"mate\" with many males in this manner.\n\nPolygynandry occurs when multiple males mate indiscriminately with multiple females. This mutual promiscuity is the approach most commonly used by spawning animals, and is perhaps the \"original fish mating system.\" Common examples are forage fish, such as herrings, which form huge mating shoals in shallow water. The water becomes milky with sperm and the bottom is draped with millions of fertilized eggs.\n\nAlternate male strategies which allow small males to engage in cuckoldry can develop in species where spawning is dominated by large and aggressive males. Cuckoldry is a variant of polyandry, and can occur with \"sneak spawners\" (sometimes called \"streak spawners\"). A sneak spawner is a male that rushes in to join the spawning rush of a spawning pair. A spawning rush occurs when a fish makes a burst of speed, usually on a near vertical incline, releasing gametes at the apex, followed by a rapid return to the lake or sea floor or fish aggregation. Sneaking males do not take part in courtship. In salmon and trout, for example, \"jack males\" are common. These are small silvery males that migrate upstream along with the standard, large, hook-nosed males and that spawn by sneaking into a redd (spawning nest) to release sperm simultaneously with a mated pair. This behaviour is an evolutionarily stable strategy for reproduction, because it is favoured by natural selection just like the \"standard\" strategy of large males.\n\nCuckoldry occurs in many fish species, including dragonets, parrotfishes and wrasses on tropical reefs and the bluegill sunfish in fresh water. Sneaker males that become too large to hide effectively become \"satellite males\". With bluegill sunfish, satellite males mimic the behaviour and colouration of the females. They hover over a nest containing a pair of courting sunfish, and gradually descend to reach the pair just as they spawn. Males may need to be 6 or 7 years old to function capably as parental males, but may be able to function as sneaker or satellite males when they are as young as 2 or 3 years old. The smaller satellite and sneaker males may get mauled by the more powerful parental males, but they spawn when they are younger and they do not put energy into parental care.\n\nHermaphroditism occurs when a given individual in a species possesses both male and female reproductive organs, or can alternate between possessing first one, and then the other. Hermaphroditism is common in invertebrates but rare in vertebrates. It can be contrasted with gonochorism, where each individual in a species is either male or female, and remains that way throughout their lives. Most fish are gonochorists, but hermaphroditism is known to occur in 14 families of teleost fishes.\n\nUsually hermaphrodites are \"sequential\", meaning they can switch sex, usually from female to male (protogyny). This can happen if a dominant male is removed from a group of females. The largest female in the harem can switch sex over a few days and replace the dominant male. This is found amongst coral reef fishes such as groupers, parrotfishes and wrasses. It is less common for a male to switch to a female (protandry). As an example, most wrasses are protogynous hermaphrodites within a haremic mating system. Hermaphroditism allows for complex mating systems. Wrasses exhibit three different mating systems: polygynous, lek-like, and promiscuous mating systems. Group spawning and pair spawning occur within mating systems. The type of spawning that occurs depends on male body size. Labroids typically exhibit broadcast spawning, releasing high amounts of planktonic eggs, which are broadcast by tidal currents; adult wrasses have no interaction with offspring. Wrasse of a particular subgroup of the family Labridae, Labrini, do not exhibit broadcast spawning.\n\nLess commonly hermaphrodites can be \"synchronous\", meaning they simultaneously possess both ovaries and testicles and can function as either sex at any one time. Black hamlets \"take turns releasing sperm and eggs during spawning. Because such egg trading is advantageous to both individuals, hamlets are typically monogamous for short periods of time–an unusual situation in fishes.\" The sex of many fishes is not fixed, but can change with physical and social changes to the environment where the fish lives.\n\nParticularly among fishes, hermaphroditism can pay off in situations where one sex is more likely to survive and reproduce, perhaps because it is larger. Anemone fishes are sequential hermaphrodites which are born as males, and become females only when they are mature. Anemone fishes live together monogamously in an anemone, protected by the anemone stings. The males do not have to compete with other males, and female anemone fish are typically larger. When a female dies a juvenile (male) anemone fish moves in, and \"the resident male then turns into a female and reproductive advantages of the large female–small male combination continue\". In other fishes sex changes are reversible. For example, if some gobies are grouped by sex (male or female), some will switch sex.\n\nUnisexuality occurs when a species is all-male or all-female. Unisexuality occurs in some fish species, and can take complex forms. \"Squalius alburnoides\", a minnow found in several river basins in Portugal and Spain, appears to be an all-male species. The existence of this species illustrates the potential complexity of mating systems in fish. The species originated as a hybrid between two species, and is diploid, but not hermaphroditic. It can have triploid and tetraploid forms, including all-female forms that reproduce mainly through hybridogenesis.\n\nIt is rare to find true parthenogenesis in fishes, where females produce female offspring with no input from males. All-female species include the Texas silverside, \"Menidia clarkhubbsi\" as well as a complex of Mexican mollies. Parthenogenesis has been recently observed in hammerhead sharks and blacktip sharks. It is also known to occur in crayfish and amphibians.\n\nThis section is patterned after a classification of the spawning behaviours of fish by Balon (1975, 1984) into reproductive guilds. This classification is based on how the eggs are fertilized (internal or external spawners), where the eggs are deposited (pelagic or benthic spawners), and whether and how the parents look after the eggs after spawning (bearers, guarders and nonguarders).\n\nNonguarders do not protect their eggs and offspring after spawning\n\nOpen substrate spawners scatter their eggs in the environment. They usually spawn in shoals without complex courtship rituals, and males outnumber females.\n\nBroadcast spawners: release their gametes (sperm and eggs) into open water for external fertilisation. There is no subsequent parental care. About 75% of coral species are broadcasters, the majority of which are hermatypic, or reef-building corals.\n\nBrood hiders hide their eggs but do not give parental care after they have hidden them. Brood hiders are mostly benthic spawners that bury the fertilized eggs. For example, among salmon and trout the female digs a nest with her tail in gravel. These nests are called redds. The female then lays her eggs while the male fertilizes them, while both fish defend the redd if necessary from other members of the same species. Then the female buries the nest, and the nest site is abandoned. In North America, some minnows build nests out of piles of stones rather than dig holes. The minnow males have tubercles on their head and body which they use to help them defend the nest site.\n\n\nBitterlings have a remarkable reproduction strategy where parents transfer responsibility for the care of their young to mussels. The female extends her ovipositor into the mantle cavity of the mussel and deposits her eggs between the gill filaments. The male then ejects his sperm into the mussel's inhalant water current and fertilization takes place within the gills of the host. The same female may use a number of mussels, and she deposits only one or two yellow, oval eggs into each. Early developmental stages are protected from predation within the body of the mussel. After 3 to 4 weeks larvae swim away from the host to continue life on their own.\n\nGuarders protect their eggs and offspring after spawning by practicing \"parental care\" (also called \"brood care\"). Parental care is an \"investment by parents in offspring that increases the offsprings' chances of surviving (and hence reproducing). In fish, parental care can take a variety of forms including guarding, nest building, fanning, splashing, removal of dead eggs, retrieval of straying fry, external egg carrying, egg burying, moving eggs or young, ectodermal feeding, oral brooding, internal gestation, brood-pouch egg carrying, etc.\"\n\nTerritorial behaviour is generally necessary for guarders, and the embryos are almost always guarded by males (apart from cichlids). There is a need to be territorial because looking after embryos usually includes defending the site where they are being looked after. It also often means there is competition for the best egg-laying sites. Elaborate courtship behaviour is usual among guarders.\n\nGuarding males keep the embryos safe from predators, keep oxygen levels high by fanning water currents, and keep the area free from dead embryos and debris. They protect the embryos until they hatch, and often look after the larval stages as well. The time spent guarding can range from a few days to several months.\n\nSome guarders build nests (\"nest spawners\") and some do not (\"substrate spawners\"), though the difference between the two groups can be small. Substrate spawners clean off a suitable area of surface suitable for egg laying, and look after the area, but they do not actively build a nest.\n\nBearers are fish that carry their embryos (and sometimes their young) around with them, either externally or internally.\n\nMouth brooders - carry eggs or larvae in their mouth. Mouth brooders can be ovophiles or larvophiles. Ovophile or egg-loving mouth-brooders lay their eggs in a pit, which are sucked up into the mouth of the female. The small number of large eggs hatch in the mother's mouth, and the fry remain there for a period of time. Fertilization often occurs with the help of egg-spots, which are colorful spots on the anal fin of the male. When the female sees these spots, she tries to pick up the egg-spots, but instead gets sperm that fertilizes the eggs in her mouth. Many cichlids and some labyrinth fish are ovophile mouthbrooders. Larvophile or larvae-loving mouth-brooders lay their eggs on a substrate and guard them until the eggs hatch. After hatching, the female picks up the fry and keeps them in her mouth. When the fry can fend for themselves, they are released. Some eartheaters are larvophile mouthbrooders.\n\nThe beginning of the evolutionary process of livebearing starts with \"facultative\" (optional) internal bearing. The process occurs in several species of oviparous (egg-laying) killifishes which spawn in the normal way on the substrate, but in the process accidentally fertilize eggs which the female retains and does not spawn. These eggs are spawned later, usually without allowing much time for embryonic development.\nThe next step in the evolution of livebearing is \"obligate\" (by necessity) internal bearing, where the female retains all the embryos. \"The only source of nutrition for these embryos, however, is the egg yolk, as in externally spawned eggs. This situation, also referred to as ovoviviparity, is characteristic of marine rock fishes and the Lake Baikal sculpins. This strategy allows these fish to have fecundities approaching those of pelagic fish with external fertilization, but it also enables them to protect the young during their most vulnerable stage of development. By contrast, sharks and rays using this strategy produce a relatively small number of embryos and retain them for a few weeks to 16 months or longer. The shorter times spans are characteristic of species that eventually deposit their embryos in the environment, surrounded by a horny capsule; whereas the longer periods are characteristic of sharks that retain the embryos until they are ready to emerge as actively swimming young.\"\n\nHowever, some fish do not fit these categories. The livebearing largespring gambusia (\"Gambusia geiseri\") was thought to be ovoviviparous until it was shown in 2001 that the embryos received nutrients from the mother.\n\nSpawning grounds are the areas of water where aquatic animals spawn, or produce their eggs. After spawning, the spawn may or may not drift to new grounds which become their nursery grounds. Many species undertake migrations each year, and sometimes great migrations, to reach their spawning grounds. For example, lakes and river watersheds can be major spawning grounds for anadromous fish such as salmon. These days, it is often necessary to construct fish ladders and other bypass systems so salmon can navigate their way past hydroelectric dams or other obstructions such as weirs on their way to spawning grounds. Coastal fish often use mangroves and estuaries as spawning grounds, while reef fish can find adjacent seagrass meadows that make good spawning grounds. Short-finned eels can travel anything up to three or four thousand kilometres to their spawning ground in deep water somewhere in the Coral Sea.\n\nForage fish often make great migrations between their spawning, feeding and nursery grounds. Schools of a particular stock usually travel in a triangle between these grounds. For example, one stock of herrings have their spawning ground in southern Norway, their feeding ground in Iceland, and their nursery ground in northern Norway. Wide triangular journeys such as these may be important because forage fish, when feeding, cannot distinguish their own offspring.\n\nCapelin are a forage fish of the smelt family found in the Atlantic and Arctic oceans. In summer, they graze on dense swarms of plankton at the edge of the ice shelf. Larger capelin also eat krill and other crustaceans. The capelin move inshore in large schools to spawn and migrate in spring and summer to feed in plankton rich areas between Iceland, Greenland, and Jan Mayen. The migration is affected by ocean currents. Around Iceland maturing capelin make large northward feeding migrations in spring and summer. The return migration takes place in September to November. The spawning migration starts north of Iceland in December or January.\n\nThe diagram on the right shows the main spawning grounds and larval drift routes. Capelin on the way to feeding grounds is coloured green, capelin on the way back is blue, and the breeding grounds are red. In a paper published in 2009, researchers from Iceland recount their application of an interacting particle model to the capelin stock around Iceland, successfully predicting the spawning migration route for 2008.\n\nReferred to as \"the greatest shoal on earth\", the sardine run occurs when millions of sardines migrate from their spawning grounds south of the southern tip of Africa northward along the Eastern Cape coastline. Chinook salmon make the longest freshwater migration of any salmon, over up the Yukon River to spawning grounds upstream of Whitehorse, Yukon. Some green sea turtles swim more than to reach their spawning grounds.\n\nGoldfish, like all cyprinids, are egg-layers. They usually start breeding after a significant temperature change, often in spring. Males chase females, prompting them to release their eggs by bumping and nudging them. As the female goldfish spawns her eggs, the male goldfish stays close behind fertilizing them. Their eggs are adhesive and attach to aquatic vegetation. The eggs hatch within 48 to 72 hours. Within a week or so, the fry begins to assume its final shape, although a year may pass before they develop a mature goldfish colour; until then they are a metallic brown like their wild ancestors. In their first weeks of life, the fry grow quickly—an adaptation born of the high risk of getting devoured by the adult goldfish.\n\nA member of the Cyprinidae, carp spawn in times between April and August, largely dependent upon the climate and conditions they live in. Oxygen levels of the water, availability of food, size of each fish, age, number of times the fish has spawned before and water temperature are all factors known to effect when and how many eggs each carp will spawn at any one time.\n\nPrior to spawning, male Siamese fighting fish build bubble nests of varying sizes at the surface of the water. When a male becomes interested in a female, he will flare his gills, twist his body, and spread his fins. The female darkens in colour and curves her body back and forth. The act of spawning takes place in a \"nuptial embrace\" where the male wraps his body around the female, each embrace resulting in the release of 10-40 eggs until the female is out of eggs. The male, from his side, releases milt into the water and fertilization takes place externally. During and after spawning, the male uses his mouth to retrieve sinking eggs and deposit them in the bubble nest (during mating the female sometimes assists her partner, but more often she will simply devour all the eggs that she manages to catch). Once the female has released all of her eggs, she is chased away from the male's territory, as it is likely that she'll eat the eggs due to hunger. The eggs then remain in the male's care. He keeps them in the bubble nest, making sure none fall to the bottom and repairing the nest as needed. Incubation lasts for 24–36 hours, and the newly hatched larvae remain in the nest for the next 2–3 days, until their yolk sacs are fully absorbed. Afterwards the fry leave the nest and the free-swimming stage begins.\n\nCopepods are tiny crustaceans which usually reproduce either by \"broadcast spawning\" or by \"sac spawning\". Broadcasting copepods scatter their eggs into the water, but sac spawners lay their eggs into an ovigerous sac. Sac spawners spawn few but relatively large eggs that develop slowly. By contrast, broadcast spawners spawn numerous small eggs that develop rapidly. However, the shorter hatch times that result from broadcasting are not short enough to compensate for the higher mortality compared to sac spawners. To produce a given number of hatched eggs, broadcasters must spawn more eggs than sac spawners.\n\nAfter mating, the fertilized eggs of the California spiny lobster are carried on the female's pleopods until they hatch, with between 120,000 and 680,000 carried by a single female. The eggs begin coral red, but darken as they develop to a deep maroon. When she is carrying the eggs, the female is said to be \"berried\". The eggs are ready to hatch after 10 weeks, and spawning takes place from May to August. The larvae that hatch (called \"phyllosoma\" larvae) do not resemble the adults. Instead, they are flat, transparent animals around long, but as thin as a sheet of paper. The larvae feed on plankton, and grow through ten molts into ten further larval stages, the last of which is around long. The full series of larval molts takes around 7 months, and when the last stage molts, it metamorphoses into the \"puerulus\" state, which is a juvenile form of the adult, though still transparent. The puerulus larvae settle to the sea floor when the water is near its maximum temperature, which in Baja California is in the fall.\n\nEgg-bearing female lobsters migrate inshore from deeper waters to hatch their eggs, though they do not have specific spawning grounds. These lobster migrations can occur in close single-file formation \"lobster trains\".\n\nOysters are \"broadcast spawners\", that is, eggs and sperm are released into open water where fertilisation occurs. They are protandric; during their first year they spawn as males by releasing sperm into the water. As they grow over the next two or three years and develop greater energy reserves, they spawn as females by releasing eggs. Bay oysters usually spawn by the end of June. An increase in water temperature prompts a few oysters to spawn. This triggers spawning in the rest, clouding the water with millions of eggs and sperm. A single female oyster can produce up to 100 million eggs annually. The eggs become fertilized in the water and develop rapidly into planktonic larvae. which eventually find suitable sites, such as another oyster's shell, on which to settle. Attached oyster larvae are called spat. Spat are oysters less than long.\n\nThe Pacific oyster usually has separate sexes. Their sex can be determined by examining the gonads, and it can change from year to year, normally during the winter months. In certain environmental conditions, one sex is favoured over the other. Protandry is favoured in areas of high food abundance and protogyny occurs in areas of low food abundance. In habitats with a high food supply, the sex ratio in the adult population tends to favour females, and areas with low food abundances tend to have a larger proportion of male adults. Spawning in the Pacific oyster occurs at . This species is very fecund, with females releasing about 50–200 million eggs in regular intervals (at a rate of 5–10 times a minute) in a single spawning. Once released from the gonads, the eggs move through the suprabranchial chambers (gills), are then pushed through the gill ostia into the mantle chamber, and are finally released in the water, forming a small cloud. In males, the sperm is released at the opposite end of the oyster, along with the normal exhalent stream of water. A rise in water temperature is thought to be the main cue in the initiation of spawning, as the onset of higher water temperatures in the summer results in earlier spawning in the Pacific oyster.\n\nThe larvae of the Pacific oyster are planktotrophic, and are about 70 µm at the prodissoconch 1 stage. The larvae move through the water column via the use of a larval foot to find suitable settlement locations. They can spend several weeks at this phase, which is dependent on water temperature, salinity and food supply. Over these weeks, larvae can disperse great distances by water currents before they metamorphose and settle as small spat. Similar to other oyster species, once the Pacific oyster larvae find a suitable habitat, they attach to it permanently using cement secreted from a gland in their foot. After settlement, the larvae metamorphose into juvenile spat. The growth rate is very rapid in optimum environmental conditions, and market size can be achieved in 18 to 30 months.\n\nCephalopods, such as squid and octopuses, have prominent heads and a set of arms (tentacles) modified from the primitive foot of molluscs. All cephalopods are sexually dimorphic. However, they lack external sexual characteristics, so they use colour communication. A courting male approaches a likely looking mate flashing his brightest colours, often in rippling displays. If the other cephalopod is female and receptive, her skin will change colour to become pale, and mating will occur. If the other cephalopod remains brightly coloured, it is taken as a warning.\n\nAll cephalopods reproduce by spawning eggs. Most cephalopods use semi-internal fertilization where the male places his gametes inside the female's mantle cavity to fertilize the ova in the female's single ovary. The \"penis\" in most male cephalopods is a long and muscular end of the gonoduct used to transfer spermatophores to a modified sperm-carrying arm called a hectocotylus. That in turn is used to transfer the spermatophores to the female. In species where the hectocotylus is missing, the \"penis\" is long and able to extend beyond the mantle cavity and transfers the spermatophores directly to the female. In many cephalopods, mating occurs head to head and the male may simply transfer sperm to the female. Others may detach the sperm-carrying arm and leave it attached to the female. Deep water squid have the greatest known penis length relative to body size of all mobile animals, second in the entire animal kingdom only to certain sessile barnacles. Penis elongation in the greater hooked squid may result in a penis that is as long as the mantle, head and arms combined.\n\nSome species brood their fertilized eggs: female paper nautilus construct shelters for the young, while Gonatiid squid carry a larva-laden membrane from the hooks on their arms. Other cephalopods deposit their young under rocks and aerate them with their tentacles hatching. Mostly the eggs are left to their own devices; many squid lay sausage-like bunches of eggs in crevices or occasionally on the sea floor. Cuttlefish lay eggs separately in cases and attach them to coral or algal fronds. Like Pacific salmon, cephalopods are mostly semelparous, spawning many small eggs in one batch and then dying. Cephalopods usually live fast and die young. Most of the energy extracted from their food is used for growing, and they mature rapidly to their adult size. Some gain as much as 12% of their body mass each day. Most live for one to two years, reproducing and then dying shortly thereafter.\n\nEchinoderms are marine animals, widespread in all oceans, but not found in fresh water. Just below their skin is an endoskeleton composed of calcareous plates or ossicles.\n\nSea urchins are spiky echinoderms with spherical bodies which usually contain five gonads. They move slowly, feed mostly on seaweed, and are important for the diet of sea otters. Sea urchins are dioecious, having separate male and female sexes, although there is generally no easy way to distinguish the two. The gonads are lined with muscles underneath the peritoneum, and these allow the animal to squeeze its gametes through the duct and into the surrounding sea water, where fertilization takes place. Their roe (male and female gonads) is soft and melting, with a colour ranging from orange to pale yellow, and is sought after as a human delicacy in many parts of the world.\n\nSea cucumbers are leathery echinoderms with elongated bodies which contain a single, branched gonad. They are found on the sea floor worldwide, and occur in great numbers on the deep sea floor where they often make up the majority of the animal biomass. They feed on plankton and decaying organic debris found at the sea bottom, catching food that flows by with their open tentacles or sifting through bottom sediments. Like sea urchins, most sea cucumbers reproduce by releasing sperm and ova into the ocean water. Depending on conditions, one organism can produce thousands of gametes.\n\nSea cucumbers are typically dioecious, with separate male and female individuals. The reproductive system consists of a single gonad, consisting of a cluster of tubules emptying into a single duct that opens on the upper surface of the animal, close to the tentacles. Many species fertilise their eggs internally. The fertilised egg develops in a pouch on the adult's body and eventually hatches as a juvenile sea cucumber. A few species brood their young inside the body cavity, giving birth through a small rupture in the body wall close to the anus. The remaining species develop their eggs into a free-swimming larva, usually after about three days of development. This larva swims by means of a long band of cilia wrapped around its body. As the larva grows it transforms into a barrel-shaped body with three to five separate rings of cilia. The tentacles are usually the first adult features to appear, before the regular tube feet.\n\nAmphibians are found in and around fresh water lakes and ponds, but not in marine environments. Examples are frogs and toads, salamanders, newts and caecilians (which resemble snakes). They are cold-blooded animals that metamorphose from a juvenile water-breathing form, usually to an adult air-breathing form, though mudpuppies retain juvenile gills in adulthood.\n\nFemale frogs and toads usually spawn gelatinous egg masses containing thousands of eggs in water. Different species lay eggs in distinctive and identifiable ways. For example, the American toad lays long strings of eggs. The eggs are highly vulnerable to predation, so frogs have evolved many techniques to ensure the survival of the next generation. In colder areas the embryo is black to absorb more heat from the sun, which speeds up development. Most commonly, this involves synchronous reproduction. Many individuals will breed at the same time, overwhelming the actions of predators; the majority of the offspring will still die due to predation, but there is a greater chance some will survive. Another way in which some species avoid predators and the pathogens eggs are exposed to in ponds is to lay eggs on leaves above the pond, with a gelatinous coating designed to retain moisture. In these species the tadpoles drop into the water upon hatching. The eggs of some species laid out of water can detect vibrations of nearby predatory wasps or snakes, and will hatch early to avoid being eaten.\n\nWhile the length of the egg stage depends on the species and environmental conditions, aquatic eggs generally hatch within one week. Unlike salamanders and newts, frogs and toads never become sexually mature while still in their larval stage. The hatched eggs continue life as tadpoles, which typically have oval bodies and long, vertically flattened tails. As a general rule, free living larvae are fully aquatic. They lack eyelids and have a cartilaginous skeleton, a lateral line system, gills for respiration (external gills at first, internal gills later) and tails with dorsal and ventral folds of skin for swimming. They quickly develop a gill pouch that covers the gills and the front legs; the lungs are also developed at an early stage as an accessory breathing organ. Some species which go through the metamorphosis inside the egg and hatch to small frogs never develop gills; instead there are specialised areas of skin that take care of respiration. Tadpoles also lack true teeth, but the jaws in most species usually have two elongate, parallel rows of small keratinized structures called keradonts in the upper jaw while the lower jaw has three rows of keradonts, surrounded by a horny beak, but the number of rows can be lower (sometimes zero), or much higher. Tadpoles feed on algae, including diatoms filtered from the water through the gills. Some species are carnivorous at the tadpole stage, eating insects, smaller tadpoles, and fish. Cannibalism has been observed among tadpoles. Early developers who gain legs may be eaten by the others, so the late bloomers survive longer.\n\nSea turtles are amphibious reptiles, but they are not amphibians. Reptiles belong to the class Reptilia while amphibians belong to the class Amphibia. These are two distinct taxonomic groups. Reptiles have scales and leathery skins, while the skins of amphibians are smooth and porous. Unlike frogs, sea turtle eggs have tough, leathery shells which allow them to survive on land without drying out.\n\nSome sea turtles migrate long distances between feeding and spawning grounds. Green turtles have feeding grounds along the Brazilian coast. Each year, thousands of these turtles migrate about to their spawning ground, Ascension Island in the Atlantic, an island only across. Each year the returning turtles dig between 6,000 and 15,000 nests, often returning to the same beach from where they hatched. Females usually mate every two to four years. Males on the other hand visit the breeding areas every year, attempting to mate. Green sea turtles' mating is similar to other marine turtles. Female turtles control the process. A few populations practice polyandry, although this does not seem to benefit hatchlings. After mating in the water, the female moves above the beach's high tide line where she digs a hole with her hind flippers and deposits her eggs. Litter size depends on the age of the female and species, but green turtle clutches range between 100 and 200. She then covers the nest with sand and returns to the sea.\n\nAt around 45 to 75 days, the eggs hatch during the night and the hatchlings instinctively head directly into the water. This is the most dangerous time in a turtle's life. As they walk, predators such as gulls and crabs grab them. A significant percentage never make it to the ocean. Little is known of the initial life history of newly hatched sea turtles. Juveniles spend three to five years in the open ocean before they settle as still-immature juveniles into their permanent shallow-water lifestyle. It is speculated that they take twenty to fifty years to reach sexual maturity. Individuals live up to eighty years in the wild. They are among the larger sea turtles, many more than a meter long and weighing up to .\n\nAquatic insects also spawn. Mayflies \"are famed for their short adult life. Some species have under an hour to mate and lay their eggs before they die. Their pre-adult stage, known as the subimago, may be even shorter - perhaps lasting just a few minutes before they moult into their adult form. Therefore a mayfly spends most of its life as a nymph, hidden from view under the water.\"\n\nCorals can be both gonochoristic (unisexual) and hermaphroditic, each of which can reproduce sexually and asexually. Reproduction also allows corals to settle new areas.\n\nCorals predominantly reproduce sexually. 25% of hermatypic corals (stony corals) form single sex (gonochoristic) colonies, while the rest are hermaphroditic. About 75% of all hermatypic corals \"broadcast spawn\" by releasing gametes—eggs and sperm—into the water to spread offspring. The gametes fuse during fertilization to form a microscopic larva called a planula, typically pink and elliptical in shape. A typical coral colony form several thousand larvae per year to overcome the odds against formation of a new colony.\n\nPlanulae exhibit positive \"phototaxis\", swimming towards light to reach surface waters where they drift and grow before descending to seek a hard surface to which they can attach and establish a new colony. They also exhibit positive \"sonotaxis\", moving towards sounds that emanate from the reef and away from open water. High failure rates afflict many stages of this process, and even though millions of gametes are released by each colony very few new colonies form. The time from spawning to settling is usually 2–3 days, but can be up to 2 months. The larva grows into a polyp and eventually becomes a coral head by asexual budding and growth.\n\nSynchronous spawning is very typical on the coral reef and often, even when multiple species are present, all corals spawn on the same night. This synchrony is essential so that male and female gametes can meet. Corals must rely on environmental cues, varying from species to species, to determine the proper time to release gametes into the water. The cues involve lunar changes, sunset time, and possibly chemical signalling. Synchronous spawning may form hybrids and is perhaps involved in coral speciation. In some places the spawn can be visually dramatic, clouding the usually clear water with gametes, typically at night.\n\nCorals use two methods for sexual reproduction, which differ in whether the female gametes are released:\n\n\nFungi are not plants, and require different conditions for optimal growth. Plants develop through photosynthesis, a process that converts atmospheric carbon dioxide into carbohydrates, especially cellulose. While sunlight provides an energy source for plants, mushrooms derive all of their energy and growth materials from their growth medium, through biochemical decomposition processes. This does not mean that light is an unnecessary requirement, since some fungi use light as a signal to induce fruiting. However, all the materials for growth must already be present in the growth medium. Instead of seeds, mushrooms reproduce sexually during underground growth, and asexually through spores. Either of these can be contaminated with airborne microorganisms, which will interfere with mushroom growth and prevent a healthy crop. Mycelium, or actively growing mushroom culture, is placed on growth substrate to seed or introduce mushrooms to grow on a substrate. This is also known as inoculation, spawning or adding spawn. Its main advantages are to reduce chances of contamination while giving mushrooms a firm beginning.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "19680709", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19680709", "title": "Balushahi", "text": "Balushahi\n\nBalushahi is a traditional dessert originating from the Indian subcontinent. It is popular sweet from the Indian subcontinent. Balushahi is similar to a glazed doughnut in terms of ingredients, but differs in texture and taste. In South India, a similar pastry is known as badushah.\n\nBalushahis are made of maida flour, and are deep-fried in clarified butter and then dipped in sugar syrup.\n\nBadushahs (also spelled Bhadushah) are made from a stiff dough made with all-purpose flour, ghee and a pinch of baking soda. One-inch-diameter , discs are shaped with hands, fried in ghee or oil and dunked in thick sugar syrup so that there is a sugar coating. They are very sweet, but tasty with a slightly flaky texture.\n\nBadushah is sold in sweet shops in Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu.\nBadushah have been served at Bimbis at Pazhvangadi in Thiruvananthapuram and at Sri Rama Vilas (better-known Gundappa's hotel).\n\n"}
{"id": "19685528", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19685528", "title": "Goldschläger", "text": "Goldschläger\n\nGoldschläger is a Swiss cinnamon schnapps (43.5% alcohol by volume or 87 proof; originally it was 53.5% alcohol or 107 proof), a liqueur with very thin, yet visible flakes of gold floating in it. The actual amount of gold has been measured at approximately 13 mg in a one litre bottle. As of January 2018 this amounts to €0.46 EUR or lower on the international gold market.\n\nGoldschläger was produced in Switzerland until the 1990s, when the brand was acquired by Diageo, which continued production in Italy. Since 2008 it is a brand of Global Brands and was produced in Switzerland again. Bloomberg reported in November 2018 that Diageo agreed to sell Goldschläger as part of a 19-brand portfolio of spirits brands to the U.S. distiller Sazerac Co. The German word \"Goldschläger\" (\"gold beater\") designates the profession of gold leaf makers, who beat bars of gold into micrometre-thin sheets.\n"}
{"id": "19707687", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19707687", "title": "Rumali roti", "text": "Rumali roti\n\nRumali roti is a thin flatbread originating from the Indian subcontinent, popular in India and in Punjab, Pakistan. It is eaten with tandoori dishes. The word \"rumal\" means handkerchief in many north Indian languages, and the name \"rumali roti\" means handkerchief bread. In Punjab, it is also known as lamboo roti. Lamboo simply means long in Punjabi. It is also known as dosti roti in the Caribbean.\n\nThis bread is extremely thin and limp, and served folded like a handkerchief. During the Mughal period, rumali roti was used like a cloth to wipe grease off the hands at the end of a rich meal.\n\nRumali is usually made with a combination of whole wheat atta flour and white wheaten maida flour (\"atta\") and cooked on the convex side of a karahi.\n\nA variaton of rumali roti from Bannu and surrounding areas of Waziristan is a much larger version called paasti or paosti chappatai, which means soft chappati. They are served as part of a meal known as penda, () usually prepared for a large gathering. Paosti is baked on a batt, which is a 55-gallon drum split in half length-wise and inverted over coal or wood fire.\n\nIn the late buddhist period, Mandaka, today called mande or manda or puran poli was a large paratha bread stuffed with sweetened pulse paste and baked on an inverted pot. Rumali roti is its plain version.\n"}
{"id": "19712244", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19712244", "title": "Chocolate bullets", "text": "Chocolate bullets\n\nChocolate bullets are a type of confectionery sold by confectionery companies in Australia and New Zealand, such as FYNA, Darrell Lea or Cadbury (the latter formerly as The Natural Confectionery Company). They consist of a licorice bullet coated with milk or dark chocolate.\n\nTheir shape is elliptical, oval-shaped, or cylindrical with curved ends.\n"}
{"id": "19715466", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19715466", "title": "Qazı", "text": "Qazı\n\nQazı is a traditional sausage-like food of Kazakhs, Tatars, Kyrgyz, Uzbeks and other ethnic groups mainly of Central Asia, particularly those of Turkic origin. Kazy is a common element on a dastarkhan, a table set for a festive meal. \"Qazy\" is a dish in Kazakh and Kyrgyz cuisines made from horse rib meat sausage in natural intestine casing and sliced horse butt. A reviewer from Vice (magazine) described the dish as smokey and earthy.\n\nHorse flesh ribs are cut out with the meat and hung for 5–7 hours to drain the remaining blood. The intestines of the horse are thoroughly washed and kept in saline water for 1–2 hours. The meat from the ribs is salted, seasoned with pepper and garlic and left roped in cloth for 2–3 hours. Then the intestines are filled with the rib meat and the two ends of the filled intestine are tied. After this preparation, the kazy can be smoked or hung to dry for a week at a sun-lit placed exposed to wind. Smoking is performed in a thick smoke of 50–60° for 12–18 hours.\n\nBefore serving, the kazy is cooked in boiling water for 2 hours. The cooked kazy is sliced into 1 cm thick pieces and served with onion and seasonal crops.\n\nIn Uzbekistan this dish is often served to Pilaf, in Kazakhstan it could be included to Beshbarmak or simply sliced as an appetizer to the table. \nIn mountain regions sometimes kazy is made from deer.\n\nKazi is often eaten cold.\n\n"}
{"id": "19721214", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19721214", "title": "Quince cheese", "text": "Quince cheese\n\nQuince cheese, (also known as quince paste), is a sweet, thick jelly made of the pulp of the quince fruit. It is a common confection in several countries.\n\nTraditionally and predominantly from the Iberian Peninsula, in Spain it is called \"dulce de membrillo\" and \"marmelada\" in Portugal, where it is a firm, sticky, sweet reddish hard paste made of the quince (\"Cydonia oblonga\") fruit. It is also very popular in Brazil (as \"marmelada\"), France (as \"pâte de coing\"), Argentina (as \"dulce de membrillo\"), Uruguay, Italy, Chile, Peru, Mexico and Israel (where it is a typical Sephardi dish).\n\nThe recipe is probably of ancient origin; the Roman cookbook of Apicius, a collection of Roman cookery recipes compiled in the late 4th or early 5th century AD gives recipes for stewing quince with honey.\n\nHistorically, marmalade was made from quinces. The English word \"marmalade\" comes from the Portuguese word \"marmelada\", meaning \"quince preparation\" (and used to describe quince cheese or quince jam; \"\"marmelo\"\" = \"quince\"). Nowadays (in English) \"A marmalade is a jellied fruit product which holds suspended within it all or part of the fruit pulp and the sliced peel. It is prepared from pulpy fruits, preferably those that contain pectin. Citrus fruits are especially desirable because of their flavor and pectin content.\"\n\nQuince cheese is prepared with quince fruits. The fruit is first cooked in water, and the strained pulp is then cooked with sugar. It turns red after a long cooking time, and becomes a relatively firm quince jelly, dense enough to hold its shape. The taste is sweet but slightly astringent, and it is similar in consistency, flavor and use to guava cheese or guava paste.\n\nQuince cheese is sold in squares or blocks, then cut into thin slices and spread over toasted bread or sandwiches, plain or with cheese, often served for breakfast or as a snack, with manchego, mató, or Picón cheese. It is also often used to stuff pastries.\n\nIn Spain, Ecuador, Argentina, Chile, Mexico and Uruguay, the quince (Spanish \"membrillo\") is cooked into a reddish gelatin-like block or firm reddish paste known as \"dulce de membrillo\". The Pastafrola, a sweet tart common in Argentina, Uruguay and Paraguay, is usually filled with quince paste. In Argentina and Uruguay, a slice of quince cheese (\"dulce de membrillo\") eaten with a slice of soft cheese is considered the national dessert. In Argentina it is referred to as \"vigilante\". In Uruguay it is known as \"Martín Fierro\" in reference to the folk character from the epic poem Martín Fierro by Argentinian author José Hernandez.\n\nIn the Philippines the dessert is known as \"membrilyo\" even if it is made of guava, since quince is unavailable in the former Spanish colony. It is a traditional part of the nochebuena array served on Christmas Eve.\n\nIn French \"quince paste\" or \"pâte de coing\" is part of the Provence Christmas traditions and part of the thirteen desserts, which are the traditional dessert foods used in celebrating Christmas in the French region of Provence.\n\nIn Serbia, especially Vojvodina, all of Hungary, and continental Croatia, i.e., Slavonija quince cheese is an often prepared sweet and is named \"kitn(i)kes\", derived from German \"Quittenkäse\".\n\nQuince cheese, a New England specialty of the 18th century, required all-day boiling to achieve a solidified state, similar to the French \"cotignac\".\n\nIn Hungary, quince cheese is called \"birsalmasajt\", and is prepared with small amounts of lemon zest, cinnamon or cloves and often with peeled walnut inside. Péter Melius Juhász, the Hungarian botanist, mentioned quince cheese as early as 1578 as a fruit preparation with medical benefits.\n\nIn Vojvodina, its sometimes prepared with addition of finely grated walnut, hazelnut or pumpkin seeds. Sometimes a certain amount of sugar would be replaced by an equal amount of linden honey.\n\nIn Pakistan, quinces are stewed together with sugar until they turn bright red. The resulting stewed quince, called \"muraba\", is then preserved in jars.\n\n"}
{"id": "19729851", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19729851", "title": "Almogrote", "text": "Almogrote\n\nAlmogrote is a soft paste made from hard cheese, peppers, olive oil, garlic, and other ingredients, which is typically eaten spread on toast. It is native to La Gomera in the Canary Islands.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "19732778", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19732778", "title": "Palm syrup", "text": "Palm syrup\n\nMiel de palma (lit. palm honey, also palm syrup) is an edible sweet syrup produced from the sap of a number of palms. It is produced in the Canary Islands and coastal regions of South America.\n\nIn the Canary Islands, palm syrup (\"miel de palma\") is produced from the Canary Island Date Palm (\"Phoenix canariensis\"). In Chile, palm syrup (\"miel de palma\") is produced from the endangered Chilean Wine Palm (\"Jubaea chilensis\").\nOther species used include the coconut palm, sugar palm, and palmyra palm.\n\nMost guarapo and miel de palma production occurs in the municipality of Vallehermoso on La Gomera. The process of collecting sap from the palm and concentrating it into syrup is similar in many ways to the process used for maple syrup.\n\nThe sap, known as \"guarapo\" or \"garapa\", is collected from a bowl-shaped depression cut into the crown of the tree. As guarapo spoils quickly in sunlight, the harvesting is done overnight. Every evening during the harvesting season, the \"guarapero\" (farmer) prepares each tree. He climbs to the top of the tree, often using a ladder, uses a sharp knife or chisel to trim the bowl to remove surface crust and open the pores, and hoists a bucket into place beneath a pipe or channel leading from the bowl. Early the next morning, he returns and collects the filled buckets, containing ten or more litres from each tree.\n\nThe harvested guarapo is then brought to, or collected by, a local processing plant, or may be processed on site. Processing involves boiling the guarapo for several hours until it is reduced by about 90% to a dark brown syrup that is rich and sweet. It is then packaged, typically in glass jars. Palm syrup will tend to thicken and crystallize over time.\n\nAfter about four to five months of being harvested every day, during the period January to June, a tree needs five years to recuperate before it is used again.\n\nMiel de palma is used to accompany many pastries and desserts, such as pancakes and ice cream. The syrup is widely used in Southeast Asian cooking, in particular in West Bengal, where jhola gur, as it is known, is only obtainable in winter.\nIts sweetness tempers the flavours of spicy curries, adding its rich, molasses-like flavour to the food. It is also widely used as an ingredient in desserts, or drizzled over prepared foods.\n\nPalm sap is a refreshing drink, and fermented palm syrup is distilled to produce various alcohols such as arrack, a spirit similar to rum. On La Gomera it is mixed with 'Parra' (similar to grappa) to produce Gomeron.\n\nPalm syrup is also traditionally used on La Gomera for general medicinal purposes.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "19736676", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19736676", "title": "Apito", "text": "Apito\n\nApito, which is the Portuguese word for \"whistle\", refers to any of a variety of whistles.\n\nThe apito de samba (\"samba whistle\") is used during performances of samba. In a samba school, the apito de samba plays a crucial role because during these performances, the mestre de bateria – the \"band leader\" – uses the whistle to signal transitions to the band. These transitions could include changes in timbre or rhythmic pattern.The origins of the apito are undoubtedly a fairly simple instrument, but has developed as a standard today into a whistle capable of giving three notes. The LP Tri-Tone Samba Whistle shown here has its origins in Brazilian music but has become a standard in today's dance music as well. It has three distinct, complementary tones that are achieved by placing fingers over the side chamber holes in various combinations.\n\nThe rhythms played on apitos de samba are endless and often change throughout a batucada performance.\n\nOutside Brazil, especially in Europe, the samba whistle is also used as a rhythm instrument. This part is not necessarily done by the band leader.\nThe samba whistle is easy to learn, so it is also a suitable toy musical instrument for children. In samba music, the samba whistle is a perfect supplement for the maracas. This requires very loud maracas so the whistle doesn't drown them out.\n\nSamba band leaders can choose to either play a single-tone apito – common referee whistle – or a tri-tone apito. Apitos were traditionally made of wood, but now most are made of metal. The whistle is a chamber that has a small ball or dowel rod inside. When one blows air through the mouthpiece, the small ball or dowel rod moves around the chamber and hits its sides.\n\nSince, the apito de samba has a small ball or dowel rod that hits the sides of the whistle's chamber, this instrument creates a loud and shrill sound, which is useful in a samba school because the sound can be heard over the playing of the band. However one can manipulate the sound of the whistle by changing the speed at which one is blowing air through the instrument and by changing one's embouchure.\n\nAudio example of variations in apito de samba\n\nSound of a wood samba whistle (1:46 – 2:08).\n\nBand leaders using single-tone apitos can choose to hold the instrument between their teeth and create signals with both the whistle and their hands to conduct. Band leaders with tri-tone apitos hold the instrument with one hand and can use the other hand to conduct.\n\nTri-tone apitos have three holes – one on the top, one on the left, and one on the right. One can manipulate the pitch being played by covering either or both of the holes on the sides of the instrument using a thumb and/or index finger. Covering none of the holes creates the highest pitch, while covering either of the two side holes creates the middle pitch, and covering both side holes creates the apito’s lowest pitch\n\nSound of a tri-tone whistle\n"}
{"id": "19738554", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19738554", "title": "Prawn roll", "text": "Prawn roll\n\nA prawn roll is a take away item available in areas of Australia where prawn fishing is a major industry. Typically sold from stalls or small shops on the side of highways or in restaurants, prawn rolls are an inexpensive snack popular with travellers: They are homemade or available commercially, usually deep frozen. They typically are made using a soft white roll approximately long, stuffed with a dozen or more peeled prawns, lettuce and remoulade, Thousand Island or cocktail-style sauce. They may be eaten cold, deep fried, or coated in tempura batter and deep fried.\n\n"}
{"id": "19746503", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19746503", "title": "Ruddington Depot", "text": "Ruddington Depot\n\nRuddington Ordnance & Supply Depot was a Royal Ordnance Factory filling and storage facility, commissioned in 1940 and built during World War II by the United Kingdom Ministry of Defence (MoD). It was located to the south of Ruddington, Nottinghamshire, and took 18 months to build. In operation it consisted of over 200 buildings employing 4,000 workers at peak. It was decommissioned in 1945, became a storage area for ex-military vehicles which were then auctioned-off onsite, and was closed in 1985. Today the site is located in the Rushcliffe Country Park.\n\nAs World War II erupted, the MoD surveyed and purchased land for the construction of a national Royal Ordnance Factory, capable of the supplying the armed forces with sufficient armaments to win the war. Sites were chosen that were (for safety reasons) remote from dense populations, but easily accessible via mainline railways from a number of towns and cities to allow the large number of workers access. This latter provision also sought a location close to key railway junctions, allowing easy access inwards for raw materials as well as quick distribution of the final product to the key seaports.\n\nPrior to 1940 the site was used as agricultural land, located on the Great Central Railway between the major East Midlands cities of Nottingham and Leicester. The proposed ROF at Ruddington was to be used as a filling factory for ammunition, employing up to 6,000 people. After purchase of the land in summer 1940, in December 1940 ground works contractors levelled off the land. At peak, the site employed 100,000 labourers during the construction phase. As well as over 200 buildings, for railway goods traffic access a branch line was built to Ruddington railway station.\n\nThe site was built to produce twice as much ammunition as it eventually produced, with the initial site laid out to allow it to do so. However, eventually the unused second part of the site was developed as an armaments storage facility.\n\nThe first part of the site was laid out as a filling factory, known as ROF Ruddington; Filling Factory No 14. Both gunpowder and shells were brought in via the branch line rail connection, into two different sets of sidings. The components were only brought together in the filling halls, some 20 wooden buildings in the centre of the complex, each with their own blast wall. Completed shells were then moved out to a small storage facility, before either being distributed directly via the railway, or taken to the separately fenced and laid out storage area.\n\nThe storage area, operated as a completely separate facility by the MoD to the ROF filling factory, stored completed shells and munitions from both the filling factory, and some other ROF facilities. These were then distributed via the railway for onwards shipment, or via road top local British Army and Home Guard units.\n\nThe complete facility was almost completely self-sufficient, equipped with:\n\n\nAs a strategic war asset, the whole site was under tight security, with both on-site security staff and the MoD Police providing round the clock protection.\n\nAfter being decommissioned in 1945, the site was used by the MoD for auctioning-off redundant ex-military vehicles and equipment. Held every eight weeks, the auctions were publicly advertised in both local and national press. The site was finally closed in 1983 when operations moved to Bicester.\n\nFrom 1985, the site was proposed for redevelopment. It had been scheduled for housing, after objections from the county council, the site was redeveloped into three sections:\n\n"}
{"id": "19766666", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19766666", "title": "Ipso (candy)", "text": "Ipso (candy)\n\nIpso was a drop-style candy manufactured by Nicholas International Ltd. and sold in Great Britain during the 1970s through 1980s. Ipso candies were similar to Tic Tac and were produced in four flavours, strawberry, lime, orange, and mint. The packaging was designed to resemble interlocking toy plastic building bricks like Lego, allowing the boxes to be stacked or connected. The boxes came in four colours reflecting the flavour of the candy inside: red for strawberry, green for lime, orange for orange, and blue for mint.\n\nThe advertising campaign, \"Ipso Calypso\", featured a man eating the sweets and daydreaming about West Indian and Jamaican dancers on a train platform. A woman interrupted the man's daydream to warn him that he would miss his train. The tagline for the sweets was \"A little refreshment will take you a long way\".\n\n"}
{"id": "19770324", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19770324", "title": "Farsan (food)", "text": "Farsan (food)\n\nFarsan or Pharsāṇ (Gujarati: ફરસાણ, Hindi and Marathi: फरसाण) refers to salty snacks originating from the Indian subcontinent. Farsans are a very important part of Gujarati cuisine, Rajasthani cuisine and Sindhi cuisine, wherein a wide variety of them are prepared on special occasions and to entertain guests, and are also enjoyed with tea. Farsan is also found throughout the rest of India, particularly Maharashtra due to the influx of Gujarati and Rajasthani traders and migration of Sindhis in Mumbai.\n\nSome are fried items which are then dried and can be stored; others are fresh or steamed.\nThe following are the main varieties of Farsan:\n\nWhen India was undivided, the State of Sindh was under Bombay Presidency also called Bombay and Sindh. Due to its proximity with Gujarat, Rajasthan and political ties with then Bombay, it shared similar culinary traditions. Though Farsan is highly adopted in Gujarati cuisines but origin is same. Sindhis in Ulhasnagar have preserved this tradition in the form of few special dishes like Batan Papdi, Sev Dal Sandwich, Dahi Sev Puri, etc.\n\n4. http://sindhirasoi.com/recipe-index/breakfast/snacks/\n"}
{"id": "19773815", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19773815", "title": "Wurzelpeter", "text": "Wurzelpeter\n\nWurzelpeter is a Kräuterlikör-type liqueur produced in Germany. It is flavoured with a variety of herbs, bark, and roots: its name references the latter (\"Wurzel\" in the German language).\n\nProduction was started in 1935 in Berlin-Mitte by Paul Pöschke and Walter Heyer. The recipe was claimed to be documented as far back as 1875. Pöschke, a cycling enthusiast, organised sponsorship of cycling events by the company. In 1949 Heyer resigned, but the company was leased by Max Finke and continued in operation.\n\nFrom 1961, when Pöschke departed for West Germany, production of Wurzelpeter was taken over by the state enterprise VEB Bärensiegel Berlin in Berlin-Adlershof. This company had its administrative headquarters in Berlin-Lichtenberg, on the Josef-Orlopp-Straße, where there was also a production branch. Wurzelpeter gradually gained some status as a cult drink, and was considered to be the East German counterpart of Jägermeister. With limited production, it had a reputation in the GDR as \"Bückware\", scarce goods available 'under the counter' through bartering or to favoured customers.\n\nVEB Bärensiegel Berlin became Berliner Bärensiegel GmbH after the fall of the Berlin Wall. In 1990 the company was acquired by Franz Wilhelm Langguth Erben, a winery with its headquarters in Traben-Trarbach, a municipality in the district Bernkastel-Wittlich. Berliner Bärensiegel GmbH continued to produce and bottle the herbal liqueur in Berlin-Lichtenberg. Despite international competition, former East Germans stayed loyal to the brand.\n\nIn 2017 Wurzelpeter's recipe was altered to a formulation said to be closer to that of 1935, along with an increase in strength from 30% to 40% ABV and a repositioning of the brand to emphasise its Berlin heritage. The labelling continues to emphasise the character, described as a kobold, traditionally featured in the brand's advertising.\n"}
{"id": "19780377", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19780377", "title": "Crown Pilot Crackers", "text": "Crown Pilot Crackers\n\nCrown Pilot was a brand of cracker popular in much of New England in the United States. It was manufactured by Nabisco (a subsidiary of Kraft Foods as of 2000) until it was discontinued in the first quarter of 2008. The cracker was unsalted, and closely related to the food \"hardtack\". The crackers were an important ingredient in historical recipes of clam chowder and a staple in many New England pantries.\n\nThe Crown Pilot cracker is Nabisco's oldest recipe, which was acquired with their purchase of a bakery in Newburyport, Massachusetts. The recipe was originally created by John Pearson of Newburyport in 1792 for producing seagoing biscuits.\n\nThe cracker was discontinued once before in 1996 by Nabisco. This sparked the publicized protests of Donna Damon on Chebeague Island and Maine humorist Tim Sample, which eventually led to an episode of CBS News Sunday Morning with Charles Osgood covering the events. Shortly after this, the company resumed production in 1997 after complaints.\n\nProduction of Crown Pilot crackers was ended again by Kraft in 2008, reportedly due to drops in the sales of the product since the 1990s. According to the Kraft spokeswoman, Laurie Guzzinati, demand for the crackers was half of what it was 12 years earlier, with about 241,000 pounds sold in 1996.\n\nThe crackers are an important ingredient in many New England recipes for seafood stuffings, chowders, and soups as well as in many recipes of the Canadian Maritimes and Newfoundland and Labrador including fish and brewis.\n"}
{"id": "19783453", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19783453", "title": "Svíčková", "text": "Svíčková\n\nSvíčková, or svíčková na smetaně is a Czech meat dish and one of the most popular Czech meals. It is sirloin steak prepared with vegetables (carrots, parsley root, celeriac and onion), spiced with black pepper, allspice, bay leaf and thyme, and boiled with double cream. It is generally served with \"houskové knedlíky\" (bread dumplings).\n\nSvíčková, or svíčková na smetaně (marinated beef sirloin) is a typical Czech dish and one of the most popular Czech meals. It is sirloin marinated overnight with vegetables (carrots, parsley root, celeriac, and blue onion, red onion, silver onion or pink onion), spiced with black pepper, juniper, allspice, bay leaf, and baked together, then vegetables and gravy are gathered, mashed/mixed with sour double cream and boiled for sauce. It is generally served with bread dumplings (houskové knedlíky) and cranberry sauce.\nNote: In most restaurants and canteens the staff actually boils the beef, instead of baking it.\n\n\"Svíčková na smetaně\" is served with a cream (\"smetana\") topping and usually with cranberry sauce and slice of lemon in many restaurants around the Czech Republic.\n\nBohemian immigrants to the United States following the First World War have passed on an older variation of the dish to subsequent generations, while regional tastes and product availability have influenced its preparation. Svíčková made in the Chicago area, for example, rarely includes vegetables in its final presentation, but instead incorporates them into a vinegar-based marinade suffused with crushed allspice and bay leaves.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "19788845", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19788845", "title": "Trou du Cru", "text": "Trou du Cru\n\nTrou du Cru is a very strong, pungent French cheese, developed by the cheesemaker Robert Berthaut in the early 1980s. It is a pasteurized cow's milk Époisses cheese from the Bourgogne region.\n\nThe soft cheese is ivory-yellow in color, with an orange, edible rind. For four weeks during its maturation, each small cheese is washed individually with Marc de Bourgogne, a strong local alcohol, which imparts a straw-like flavor to the cheese. \n\nTrou du Cru is molded in small (1.5 in, 60 g) rounds, packaged in paper cups; and in medium (4.5 in, 250 g) wheels, packaged in wooden containers.\n\n"}
{"id": "19792279", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19792279", "title": "Diocletian window", "text": "Diocletian window\n\nDiocletian windows, also called thermal windows, are large semicircular windows characteristic of the enormous public baths (\"thermae\") of Ancient Rome. They have been revived on a limited basis by some classical revivalist architects in more modern times.\n\nDiocletian windows are large segmental arched windows (or other openings) which are usually divided into three lights (window compartments) by two vertical mullions. The central compartment is often wider than the two side lights on either side of it.\n\nDiocletian windows are named after the windows found in the Thermae (Baths) of Diocletian (AD 302) in Rome. (The Thermae is now the church of Santa Maria degli Angeli e dei Martiri.) The variant name, thermal window, also comes from their association with the Thermae of Diocletian.\n\nThis type of window was revived and used in Italy in the 16th century, especially by Andrea Palladio. Palladio and others incorporated an elongated Diocletian window in the form of an arched central light flanked by narrower, square-headed apertures. This combination became known as a Palladian, or Venetian, window.\n\nThe Diocletian window was much used in the early 18th century by the English architect Richard Boyle, 3rd Earl of Burlington, one of the originators of the English Palladian style, and by his followers.\n\nDiocletian windows continued to be used occasionally in large public buildings in the various devolutions of neoclassical architecture including the Beaux Arts movement (1880–1920).\n\n"}
{"id": "19805839", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19805839", "title": "Spongiosis", "text": "Spongiosis\n\nSpongiosis is mainly intercellular edema (abnormal accumulation of fluid) in the epidermis, and is characteristic of eczematous dermatitis, manifested clinically by intraepidermal vesicles (fluid-containing spaces), \"juicy\" papules, and/or lichenification. It is a severe case of eczema that affects the epidermis, dermis and/or subcutaneous skin tissues. The three types of spongiotic are acute, subacute and chronic. A Dermatologist can diagnose acute spongiotic by examining your skin during an office visit but a biopsy is needed for an accurate diagnosis of the type. \n\nIt can be caused by several internal or external factors such as food, an insect bite, stress, medication or cosmetics. The treatment varies depending on the type and severity; it is normally treated with topical corticosteroid cream. \n\n"}
{"id": "19813878", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19813878", "title": "Bermudian cuisine", "text": "Bermudian cuisine\n\nBermudian cuisine is the cuisine of the British Overseas Territory of Bermuda.\nThe cuisine of the islands reflects a rich and diverse history and heritage blending English cuisine and Portuguese cuisine with preparations of local seafood species, particularly wahoo and rockfish. Traditional dishes include codfish and potatoes served either with an add on of hard boiled egg and butter or olive oil sauce with a banana or in the Portuguese style with tomato-onion sauce, peas and rice. Hoppin' John, pawpaw casserole and fish chowder are also specialties of Bermuda. As most ingredients used in Bermuda’s cuisine are imported, local dishes are offered with a global blend, with fish as the major ingredient, in any food eaten at any time.\n\nThere are several dishes served on Bermuda that are unique to the island which offer a taste of traditional Bermudian culture. Fish is one of the main ingredients in Bermudian cuisine. Local fish includes mahi mahi, snapper, spiny lobster (during September–March), tuna, and wahoo. These are used in dishes such as fish and chips, panfried fish, and boiled salted codfish and potato, a traditional dish in Bermuda (usually served on Sundays with tomato sauce and olive oil).\n\nFish chowder is considered a national dish, which is a staple food not only in restaurants and hotels but also in homes; the main ingredients are fish stock, fish, vegetables and bacon fat and served with spices, but a Bermudan specialty is to serve it with black rum and sherry peppers. Beef stock is an essential ingredient in Bermudian fish chowder. sherry pepper is prepared with ripe and very hot bird peppers using sherry for marinating it, and supplemented with herbs and spices; and black rum is rum is derived by blackening with molasses in a special barrel for aging.\n\nThe specialty in some restaurants during the week end is a codfish brunch. It is a large serving of full blown codfish, boiled and steamed with salt, and with boiled potatoes, onions, and sliced bananas. The topping is with hard-boiled egg or tomato sauce, and, also occasionally with avocado slices.\n\nAppetizers served are a shark hash and Codfish cakes. Shark hash is minced shark meat, sautéed with spices, and served on toast. Codfish cake is made out of salted cod mash (smashed) and with cooked potatoes and fresh thyme and parsley. Then, it is formed made in to patty and fried on a pan. It is also served with topping of a \"zesty fruit salsa and a side of mesclun salad\" sandwiched in a white bun with mayonnaise.\n\nAlmost every type of vegetable can be grown in Bermuda. Growers provide cabbage, celery, cucumbers, French beans, green peas, carrots, parsnips, radishes, and turnips for local tables. Flax, capsicums and peppers are also locally grown and incorporated in local cuisine. English onions arrived in Bermuda around 1616 where they became known as Bermuda Onions. The Bermudans make use of the abundance of locally grown fruits in fruit salads, incorporating strawberries, loquats, grapefruit, watermelon, papaya, cassava, and Suriname cherries.\n\nFor vegetarians, the choice is very limited to dishes prepared with fresh Bermuda carrots, onions, potatoes, and green beans but without any meat.\n\nCorn bread, originating in Mexico and sweet Easter bread, originating in the British West Indies are incorporated into menus. Bananas are versatile in local cuisine, and may be used to make banana crumble and desserts made from strawberries and cherries, fried as fritters, or flamed in rum. Desserts with bananas are also baked in rum and brown sugar. Jelly-roll or sponge cake, served with peaches or strawberries, bananas, custard, chopped nuts, and whipped cream and soaked in sherry is also a common dessert. Another notable Bermudian dessert is the restaurant Fresco's chocolate mousse cake, which is served fresh out of the oven with roasted almonds, toffee, marshmallow ice cream, and pistachio creme.\n\nSweet potato pudding makes use of cinnamon, cloves, and lemon or orange juice, and is especially popular on Guy Fawkes Night. Hot cross buns with codfish cakes are a Good Friday fare. Dating to 1612, cassava pie is a Christmas dinner specialty, combining chicken or pork with eggs, brandy and sweet pastry. However, this dish is now offered as a side dish in restaurants on any day. Though every Bermudian family follows its individual recipe, cassava pie includes grated cassava, butters, eggs, salt and sugar. While beef and pork were initially added to chicken for the pie filling, beef and pork are no longer favored. Mussel pie is also a common dish. Its ingredients are shelled mussels, potatoes, and onions. It is served baked and seasoned with thyme, parsley, and curry. Bermuda's Culinary Arts Festival occurs in November and features celebrity seminars as well as gourmet food demonstrations and tastings.\n"}
{"id": "19818442", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19818442", "title": "Chashni", "text": "Chashni\n\nChashni (Hindi: चाश्नी, Urdu: چاشنی) is the generic name in North Indian, Pakistani, Nepali and Afghan languages for a sugary syrup. The syrup is usually thin enough to allow some swirling, and can have several flavours incorporated in it, such as rose or saffron. Chashni or sugar syrup is used in many Indian sweets and desserts in varying consistencies such as one-thread, two-thread or three-thread consistency (1 tar-chasni, 2 tar-chasni or 3 tar-chasni).\nIts preparation involves boiling of water with sugar and stirring till the desired consistency is reached.\nFor foods in which chashni needs to be absorbed, a thinner consistency called single thread syrup is used. Sweets that need sugar to set use two thread syrup, which is obtained by boiling and stirring for a longer time. Three thread syrup is used in making Indian ground sugar.\n\nThe word originates from Persian, in which it means \"taste\", or \"flavour\".\n\n"}
{"id": "19827644", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19827644", "title": "Arura", "text": "Arura\n\nArura or (Greek: ἄρουρα), is a Homeric Greek word with original meaning \"arable land\", derived from the verb ἀρόω (\"aroō\"), \"plough\". The word was also used generally for earth, land and father-land and in plural to describe corn-lands and fields. The term \"arura\" was also used to describe a measure of land in ancient Egypt (similar in manner to the acre), a square of 100 Egyptian cubits each way. This measures 2700m² or 2/3 of an acre. The oldest attested form of the word is the Mycenaean Greek \"a-ro-u-ra\", written in Linear B syllabic script, originally meant \"plough\".\n\n"}
{"id": "19855700", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19855700", "title": "Chemical force microscopy", "text": "Chemical force microscopy\n\nChemical force microscopy (CFM) is a variation of atomic force microscopy (AFM) which has become a versatile tool for characterization of materials surfaces. With AFM, structural morphology is probed using simple tapping or contact modes that utilize van der Waals interactions between tip and sample to maintain a constant probe deflection amplitude (constant force mode) or maintain height while measuring tip deflection (constant height mode). CFM, on the other hand, uses chemical interactions between functionalized probe tip and sample. Choice chemistry is typically gold-coated tip and surface with R-SH thiols attached, R being the functional groups of interest. CFM enables the ability to determine the chemical nature of surfaces, irrespective of their specific morphology, and facilitates studies of basic chemical bonding enthalpy and surface energy. Typically, CFM is limited by thermal vibrations within the cantilever holding the probe. This limits force measurement resolution to ~1 pN which is still very suitable considering weak COOH/CH interactions are ~20 pN per pair. Hydrophobicity is used as the primary example throughout this consideration of CFM, but certainly any type of bonding can be probed with this method.\n\nCFM has been primarily developed by Charles Lieber at Harvard University in 1994. The method was demonstrated using hydrophobicity where polar molecules (e.g. COOH) tend to have the strongest binding to each other, followed by nonpolar (e.g. CH-CH) bonding, and a combination being the weakest. Probe tips are functionalized and substrates patterned with these molecules. All combinations of functionalization were tested, both by tip contact and removal as well as spatial mapping of substrates patterned with both moieties and observing the complementarity in image contrast. Both of these methods are discussed below. The AFM instrument used is similar to the one in Figure 1.\n\nThis is the simpler mode of CFM operation where a functionalized tip is brought in contact with the surface and is pulled to observe the force at which separation occurs, F (see Figure 2). The Johnson-Kendall-Roberts (JKR) theory of adhesion mechanics predicts this value as \n\n(1) formula_1\n\nwhere W = γ+γ-γ with R being the radius of the tip, and γ being various surface energies between the tip, sample, and the medium each is in (liquids discussed below). R is usually obtained from SEM and γ and γ from contact angle measurements on substrates with the given moieties. When the same functional groups are used, γ = γ and γ = 0 which results in F = 3πRγ. Doing this twice with two different moieties (e.g. COOH and CH) gives values of γ and γ, both of which can be used together in the same experiment to determine γ. Therefore, F can be calculated for any combination of functionalities for comparison to CFM determined values.\n\nFor similarly functionalized tip and surface, at tip detachment JKR theory also predicts a contact radius of\n\n(2) formula_2\n\nwith an “effective” Young's modulus of the tip K=(2/3)(E/(1-ν)) derived from the actual value E and the Poisson ratio ν. If one knows the effective area of a single functional group, A (e.g. from quantum chemistry simulations), the total number of ligands participating in tension can be estimated as formula_3. As stated earlier, the force resolution of CFM does allow one to probe individual bonds of even the weakest variety, but tip curvature typically prevents this. Using Eq 2, a radius of curvature R<10 nm has been determined as the requirement to conduct tensile testing of individual linear moieties.\nA quick note to mention is the work corresponding to the hysteresis in the force profile (Figure 2) does not correlate to the bond energy. The work done in retracting the tip is formula_4, approximated due to the linear behavior of deformation with F being the force and Δx being the displacement immediately before release. Using the results of Frisbie et al., normalized to the estimated 50 functional groups in contact, the work values are estimated as 39 eV, 0.25 eV, and 4.3 eV for COOH/COOH, COOH/CH, and CH/CH interactions, respectively. Roughly, intermolecular bond energies can be calculated by: E=kT, T being the boiling point. According to this, E = 32.5 meV for formic acid, HCOOH, and 9.73 meV for methane, CH, each value being about 3 orders of magnitude smaller than the experiment might suggest. Even if surface passivation with EtOH were considered (discussed below), the large error seems irrecoverable. The strongest hydrogen bonds are at most ~1 eV in energy. This strongly implies that the cantilever has a force constant smaller than or on the order of that for bond interactions and, therefore, it cannot be treated as perfectly rigid. This does open an avenue for increasing the usefulness of CFM if stiffer cantilevers can be used while still maintaining force resolution.\n\nChemical interactions can also be used to map prepatterned substrates with varying functionalities (see Figure 3). Scanning of a surface having varying hydrophobicity with a tip having no functional groups attached would produce an image with no contrast because the surface is morphologically featureless (simple AFM operation). Functionalizing a tip to be hydrophilic would cause the cantilever to bend when the tip scans across hydrophilic portions of the substrate due to strong tip-substrate interactions. This is detected by laser deflection in a position sensitive detector therefore producing a chemical profile image of the surface. Generally, a brighter area would correspond to a greater amplitude of deflection so stronger bonding corresponds to lighter areas of a CFM image map. When the cantilever functionalization is switched such that the tip is bent when encountering hydrophobic areas of the substrate instead, the complementary image is observed.\nFrictional force response to the amount of perpendicular load applied by the tip on to the substrate is shown in Figure 4. Increasing tip-substrate interactions produce a steeper slope, as one would expect. Of experimental importance is the fact that contrast between different functionalities on the surface may be enhanced with an application of greater perpendicular force. Of course, this comes at the cost of potential damage to the substrate.\n\nCapillary force is a major problem in tensile force measurements since it effectively strengthens the tip-surface interaction. It is usually caused by adsorbed moisture on substrates from ambient environment. To eliminate this additional force, measurements in liquids can be conducted. With X-terminated tip and substrate in liquid L, the addition to F is calculated using Eq 1 with W = 2γ; that is, the extra force comes from the attraction of liquid molecules to each other. This is ~10 pN for EtOH which still allows for the observation of even the weakest polar/nonpolar interactions (~20 pN). The choice of liquid is dependent on which interactions are of interest. When the solvent is immiscible with functional groups, larger than usual tip-surface bonding exists. Therefore, organic solvents are appropriate for studying van der Waals and hydrogen bonding while electrolytes are best for probing hydrophobic and electrostatic forces.\n\n A biological implementation of CFM at the nanoscale level is the unfolding of proteins with functionalized tip and surface (see Figure 5). Due to the increased contact area, the tip and the surface act as anchors holding protein bundles while they separate. As uncoiling ensues, the force required jumps indicating various stages of uncoiling: (1) separation into bundles, (2) bundle separation into domains of crystalline protein held together by van der Waals forces, and (3) linearization of the protein upon overcoming the secondary bonding. Information on the internal structure of these complex proteins, as well as a better understanding of constituent interactions are provided with this method.\nA second consideration is one that takes advantage of unique nanoscale materials properties. The high aspect ratio of carbon nanotubes (easily >1000) is exploited to image surfaces with deep features. The use of the carbon material broadens the functionalization chemistry since there are countless routes to chemical modification of nanotube sidewalls (e.g. with diazonium, simple alkyls, hydrogen, ozone/oxygen, and amines). Multiwall nanotubes are typically used for their rigidity. Because of their approximately planar ends, one can estimate the number of functional groups that are in contact with the substrate knowing tube diameter and number of walls which helps in determining single moiety tensile properties. Certainly, this method has obvious implications in tribology as well.\n"}
{"id": "19876749", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19876749", "title": "Túrós csusza", "text": "Túrós csusza\n\nTúrós csusza is a traditional Hungarian savoury cheese noodle dish made with small home-made noodles or pasta.\n\nTraditionally, noodles used for this dish are home-made with flour and eggs, mixed into a dough, and torn by hand into uneven fingernail-sized pieces that are then boiled in water. Spaghetti, fusilli or large egg macaroni bows can also be used instead of the home-made noodles.\n\nThe noodles are cooked in salt water and drained, mixed with butter, crumbled cheese (traditionally made from cow or sheep milk), chopped, fried, crispy bacon, topped with thick Hungarian sour cream (tejföl) and lightly salted. The mixture is then heated in the oven for a few minutes before serving.\n\nThe pasta is cooked in salt water and drained, mixed with butter. Layers of the cooked pasta, alternating with layers of grated cheese are baked in the oven.\n\nCabbage square or Cabbage and Noodles is a savoury Hungarian pasta dish.\n\nMacaroni bows or home-made thin pasta squares (like tiny mini lasagne) are boiled in salted water, drained, and mixed with some cooking oil or fat. The finely grated cabbage is slowly sautéed in a bowl with oil or fat, with salt, freshly ground black pepper and a pinch of sugar, until it becomes golden brown. The cabbage is then mixed into the hot pasta, and served immediately.\n\nLayers of pasta, jam and ground walnuts mixed with sugar, finished with noodles, are placed into a buttered pan. The dish is heated in the oven for a short while and served hot.\n\nCooked pasta is blended with melted butter in a pan. Sugar and ground poppy seeds are mixed and sprinkled on the hot noodles, and served immediately. This dish is also a Polish meal and a Polish Christmas dish.\n\n"}
{"id": "19887601", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19887601", "title": "Mrtyu", "text": "Mrtyu\n\nMṛtyu (from Vedic Sanskrit: मृत्यु IAST:\"\" ; \"Latin cognate mortis\"), is a Sanskrit word meaning Death. Mṛtyu or Death is often personified as the demigods \"Mara\" (मर) and \"Yama\" (यम) in Dharmic religions such as Hinduism and Buddhism.\n\nVedic \"mṛtyú\", along with Avestan \"mərəθiiu\" and Old Persian \"məršiyu\" comes from the Proto-Indo-Iranian word for death, \"*mr̥tyú-\", which is ultimately derived from the Indo-European root \"*mer-\" (\"to die\") and thus is further related to Latin \"mors\".\n\nThe Brhadaranyaka Upanishad (a mystical appendix to the Shatapatha Brahmana and likely the oldest of the Upanishads) has a creation myth where ' \"Death\" takes the shape of a horse, and includes an identification of the Ashvamedha horse sacrifice with the Sun:\n\n\n"}
{"id": "19963621", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19963621", "title": "Jelly doughnut", "text": "Jelly doughnut\n\nA jelly (or jam) doughnut is a doughnut filled with jelly filling. Varieties include the German Berliner, Australia, Britain and Nigeria's jam doughnuts, sufganiyot from Israel, and the jelly-filled doughnuts sold in the United States and Canada. Japanese anpan are similar to the Berliner, except they contain red bean paste. Krafne from Eastern Europe also include a jelly-filled variety. In Italy, bomboloni are popular. Austria also has a jelly doughnut known as krapfen that is typically filled with apricot jam and topped with powdered sugar. The Polish pączki is also similar to a jelly doughnut.\n\nA 1942 headline in the \"Hartford Courant Of Connecticut\" reported that \"Jelly Doughnut Diets Harmful to War Effort.\" A 1976 \"Los Angeles Times\" story explains how to make jelly doughnuts from scratch for a \"tasty after-school\" snack for youngsters.\n\nIn a 1997 taste test, Ruth Reichl graded jelly doughnuts from a local doughnut shop higher than ones from national chain doughnut shops.\n\nJelly or custard filled doughnuts are known as sufganiyot in Hebrew and are a popular Hanukkah treat. They are cooked in oil which is in keeping with the theme of the holiday, celebrating one day's worth of oil \"keeping a sacred lamp alight for eight.\"\n\n"}
{"id": "19977430", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19977430", "title": "Cicchetti", "text": "Cicchetti\n\nCicchetti (also sometimes spelled \"cichetti\" or called \"cicheti\" in Venetian language) are small snacks or side dishes, typically served in traditional \"bàcari\" (cicchetti bars or osterie) in Venice, Italy. Common cicchetti include tiny sandwiches, plates of olives or other vegetables, halved hard boiled eggs, small servings of a combination of one or more of seafood, meat and vegetable ingredients laid on top of a slice of bread or polenta, and very small servings of typical full-course plates. Like Spanish tapas, one can also make a meal of cicchetti by ordering multiple plates.\nNormally not a part of home cooking, the cicchetti’s importance lies not just in the food itself, but also in how, when and where they are eaten: with fingers and toothpicks, usually standing up, hanging around the counter where they are displayed in numerous bars, osterie and bacari that offer them virtually all day long.\nVenice's many cicchetti bars are quite active during the day, as Venetians (and tourists) typically eat cicchetti in the late morning, for lunch, or as afternoon snacks. Cicchetti are usually accompanied by a small glass of local white wine, which the locals refer to as an \"ombra\" (shadow).\n\nOne of the most enjoyable aspects of Venetian social life is contained in the phrase: let’s go to drink a shadow, in Venetian language “\"Andémo béver un'ombra\"” is an invitation to go for a drink, and more exactly a small glass of wine (a shadow), which is typically drunk in one shot.\n\nThe expression is a prompt of the period in which the wine were transferred in the “Riva degli Schiavoni” and then sold in shaded stands, which were located at the base of the Bell Tower of San Marco; when the sun was rotating, the stands were moved, so they could continue to stay in the shade (ombra).\n\nCicchetti is the plural form. A single piece of cicchetti is a cicchetto.\n\nIn the United States of America, cicchetti are popular in some Italian-American enclaves, where it is sometimes spelled \"chiccetti.\"\n\n\n"}
{"id": "20004392", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20004392", "title": "Candy pumpkin", "text": "Candy pumpkin\n\nA candy pumpkin is a small, pumpkin-shaped, mellowcreme confection primarily made from corn syrup, honey, carnauba wax, and sugar. Traditionally colored with an orange base and topped with a green stem to make candy pumpkins largely identifiable with Halloween, a candy pumpkin is considered a mellow creme by confectioners since the candy has a marshmallow flavor. Sometimes called candy corn's first cousin, candy pumpkins are made through a starch casting process similar to that for candy corn. Brach's candy pumpkin, known by the trademarked name \",\" is the most popular candy pumpkin. Brach's Confections is now owned by Farley's & Sathers Candy Company.\n\nCandy pumpkins are made using a similar process to make candy corn. The candy corn process and product were created by Géorge Renninger of the Wunderlee Candy Co. in the 1880s and became popular as a treat in the 1920s. Candy pumpkins first were produced in mid 20th century using a process similar to that of candy corn. Corn syrup, food coloring, honey, and sugar are beaten and heated in large kettles to produce an ultra-sweet syrup. This syrupy mix generically is called \"mellowcreme\" by confectioners, since the resulting candy has a mellow, creamy texture. The mellowcreme slurry then was divided into two uneven amounts, with the large amount receiving orange food coloring and the smaller receiving green food coloring. A mogul machine brings the two colored mixtures together into a mold made of cornstarch, and the assembly is sent to a separate drying room to dry for 24 to 36 hours. Once dry, the candy is shaken violently to remove excess cornstarch and a final glaze is added to give the candy pumpkin a sheen. Candy pumpkins, acorns and other shapes that are derived from the mellowcreme mixture are often sold with candy corn under the name \"harvest mix.\"\n\nCandy pumpkins are popular in part because the mellowcreme gives them \"an interesting texture.\" As of 1988, most big confectionery companies, including Mars Inc., did not market special Halloween candies. The one exception was Brach's Confections, which made candy pumpkins among other seasonal products. Their \"Mellowcreme Pumpkin\" was made to look like an autumnal fruit; each pumpkin contained 25 calories and 5 grams sugar. In 1992, Brach's Confections expected to sell more than 30 million pounds of mellowcreme candy during the fall season, which included its seasonal mellowcreme pumpkins. You can also find the candy pumpkin in Brach's Autumn Mix.\n\nBy the late 1990s, competitors of Brach's realized that the market for the special Halloween candy pumpkin was expanding. For example, in 1997, candy pumpkins and other mellowcreme candies helped push annual spending on Halloween candy in the United States to an estimated $950 million a year. In response, Mars, Inc. came out with Snickers Creme Pumpkin in 1998. The milk chocolate-covered peanut and caramel candy was packaged in a 1.20 oz. size with a plastic wrapper featuring a jack-o-lantern on the package. At the time, the Snickers Creme Pumpkin retailed for 50 U.S. cents. Two years later, in 2000, Frankford Candy & Chocolate Company cross-licensed with ConAgra Foods to produce Peter Pan Peanut Butter Pumpkins. Peter Pan Peanut Butter Pumpkins included a \"rich and creamy\" Peter Pan peanut butter center pressed into a detailed pumpkin mold. At that time, the Peter Pan pumpkin candy was sold in 14 oz. bags. Also in 2000, Zachary Confections expanded its product line to include candy pumpkins.\n\nIn addition to helping characterize Halloween, candy pumpkins played a role in the current U.S. implementation of daylight saving time. Since the 1960s, candy makers had wanted to get the trick-or-treat period covered by Daylight Saving, reasoning that if children have an extra hour of daylight, they would collect more candy. During the 1985 U.S Congressional hearings on Daylight Saving, the industry went so far as to put candy pumpkins on the seat of every senator, hoping to win a little favor. On July 8, 1986, President Ronald Reagan signed the Federal Fire Prevention and Control Act of 1986 into law; it contained a daylight saving rider which continued daylight saving time until the early morning of last Sunday in October; this did not include Halloween night. In 2005, daylight saving time was extended to the first Sunday in November—just long enough to include Halloween.\n"}
{"id": "20030573", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20030573", "title": "Sohan halwa", "text": "Sohan halwa\n\nSohan halwa (Urdu سوہن حلوہ; ) is a traditional dessert in West Asia and the Indian subcontinent, which is a variety of dense, sweet confection or halwa. Gheewala halwa is popular for sohan halwa since the Mughal era. There are hundreds of shops that produce sohan halwa in the cities of Multan (Punjab) and Dera Ismail Khan (Khyber Pakhtunkhwa), with a pioneering and passion of the dish going back decades.\n\nIt is made by boiling a mixture of water, sugar, milk, and cornflour until it becomes solid. Saffron is used for flavoring. Ghee is used to prevent it from sticking to the pan. Almonds, pistachios, and cardamom seeds are added. Unlike most other halwa dishes in the Indian subcontinent, it is solid, similar to its Middle Eastern counterparts.\n\nThe Hafiz Halwa shop in Multan claims it was introduced by Dewan Sawan Mal, the ruler of Multan in 1750. However, there is a theory that it was invented in Persia by Iranian people and it was considered an ancient sweet served during social gatherings.\n\nS. Abdul Khaliq claims that this halwa was introduced in the Indian subcontinent in the early 16th century when Mughal emperor Humayun (r. 1530–1540, 1555–1556) came back to power in Medieval India after being exiled in Herat, which was the capital of Persia. \n\nIn Old Delhi, the 225-year-old Ghantewala sweet shop established during the reign of Mughal Emperor Shah Alam II, (r. 1759 - 1806) in 1790, made Sohan Halwa, and remained a popular visitors attraction, till its closure due to a lack of profitability hit the news July 23, 2015.\n\nSohan has been commercially produced by traditional confectioners for decades. It is brittle and caramelised, usually made into discs of 5-6mm thickness or as square bite-size pieces. It is usually packaged in intricately designed tin cylinders. In recent years other packages have also been common.\n\n"}
{"id": "20049763", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20049763", "title": "Piti (food)", "text": "Piti (food)\n\nPiti is a soup in the cuisines of the Caucasus, its bordering nations, and Central Asia, and is prepared in the oven in individual crocks with a glazed interior (called \"piti\" in Turkic languages). It is made with mutton and vegetables (tomatoes, potatoes, chickpeas), infused with saffron water to add flavour and colour, all covered by a lump of fat, and cooked in a sealed crock. Piti is served in the crock, usually accompanied by an additional plate for \"disassembling\" the meat and the liquid part with vegetables, which may be eaten separately as the first (soup with vegs) and second (meat) course meal.\n\nPiti is particularly popular in Azerbaijan, Iran (where it is mostly called \"abgoosht\" or \"dizi\"), Tajikistan, Turkey and Armenia (where it is called \"putuk\" from the Armenian word for crock).\n\nTasty, flavourful and nourishing piti is traditionally cooked in earthenware pots called chanag, kyupe or dopu. There are so many variations from the Balkans, Moldova, Georgia and Mediterranean countries that the name is more an idea of a recipe, rather than a named stew or soup. The etymology of the name is derived from the Turkic word bitdi, which means the end of need to eat any more food. The secret to a good piti is long, slow cooking. It is usually served in two courses: the clear soup, served with flatbread (lavash) and then the solid ingredients.\n\nThe main ingredients of Azerbaijani piti are mutton, tail fat, chickpeas, potato, onions, dried alycha and saffron. Meat is gradually simmered with already soaked chickpeas in piti-pots. Potatoes, onions, alycha and saffron infusion are added 30 before the meal is ready. Sumac powder is also served separately. \n\nIn Azerbaijan, piti is eaten in two steps. First, bread is crumpled in the additional plate and sprinkled with a purple mix of spices. Then, the broth is poured over it and the resulting mixture is consumed as a hearty soup. Second, more crumpled bread is added to the same plate and the remainder of the Piti (the lump of mutton fat, the meat and the vegetables) is poured over, sprinkled with the same spices, mixed together so as to break down the fat and then eaten.\n\nPiti is cooked in different ways in Azerbaijan, especially Shaki region is renowned with its specific piti.\n\nShaki piti is specific because boiled chestnuts are used instead of potato. It is cooked in an earthenware pot called \"dopu\", which should not be a new one. Firstly, chickpeas are placed in the ceramic pots, then small pieces of mutton are added. The top layer is salted tail fat. After all of this, water is poured to the pot. Piti is cooked in 8-9 hours.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "20053806", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20053806", "title": "Zaire Use", "text": "Zaire Use\n\nThe Zaire Use () or Roman Missal for the Dioceses of Zaire is a variation of the common Mass of the Roman Catholic Church. While containing many of the elements of the Ordinary Form of the Mass of the Roman Rite, it incorporates elements from sub-Saharan African culture, a process referred to as inculturation. Promulgated by the decree Zairensium on April 30, 1988, by the Congregation for Divine Worship and the Discipline of the Sacraments, the \"Missel romain pour les diocèses du Zaïre\" (Roman Missal for the Dioceses of Zaire) is an attempt to inculturate the Roman Missal in an African context, inspired by the liturgical reform initiated at the Second Vatican Council.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "20056598", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20056598", "title": "Anoxomer", "text": "Anoxomer\n\nAnoxomer is a food additive with E number E323. It is a non-digestible polymeric antioxidant. It was designed to allow the introduction of established antioxidants in a non-absorbable manner in order to avoid potential health risk associated with their digestion.\n\nAnoxomer is prepared by condensation polymerization of divinylbenzene and a mixture of antioxidant monomers including \"tert\"-butylhydroquinone, \"tert\"-butylphenol, hydroxyanisole, \"p\"-cresol and 4,4'-isopropylidenediphenol.\n"}
{"id": "20083367", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20083367", "title": "Tootsie Roll", "text": "Tootsie Roll\n\nTootsie Roll is a flavored taffy-like candy that has been manufactured in the United States since 1907. The candy has qualities similar to both caramels and taffy without being exactly either confection, and does not melt. The manufacturer, Tootsie Roll Industries is based in Chicago, Illinois. It was the first penny candy to be individually wrapped in America.\n\nAccording to the official company history, founder Leo Hirshfield (Hirschfield) (d. 1922), an Austrian Jewish immigrant to the United States of America, started his candy business in a small shop located in New York City in 1896. The candy business was not his own; in 1896, Hirschfield, son of an Austrian candy maker, was an employee of the Stern & Staalberg company in Manhattan, New York, owned by Julius Stern and Jacob Staalberg. The first candy that Hirschfield created was Bromangelon Jelly Powder; he did not invent Tootsie Rolls until 1907, after patenting a technique to give them their unique texture. The first Tootsie Rolls were marketed in September 1908. After rising to vice-president and seeing the company change its name to Sweets Company of America in 1917 (after which Stern and Staalberg retired and the new management outranked him), Hirschfield resigned or was fired in 1920. He started Mells Candy, which went bankrupt, and as a result he committed suicide on January 14, 1922 in his room at the Monterey Hotel in Manhattan, leaving a note saying that he was \"sorry, but could not help it\". Hirschfield named the candy after his daughter Clara, whose nickname was \"Tootsie\".\n\nIn 1935, the company was in serious difficulty. Tootsie Roll's principal supplier of paper boxes, Joseph Rubin & Sons of Brooklyn, concerned about the possible loss of an important customer, decided to acquire the troubled company. The company was listed on the New York Stock Exchange, but Bernard D. Rubin acquired a list of shareholders and approached them in person in order to purchase their shares. The Rubin family eventually achieved control of Tootsie Roll and agreed that Bernard Rubin would run the company as president. Under his leadership, the company was able to steadily increase sales and restore profits by changing the formula of the Tootsie Roll and increasing its size. Additionally, Rubin moved the company from Manhattan to a much larger plant in Hoboken, New Jersey, and guided the company successfully through the difficult war years during which vital raw materials were in short supply. When he died in 1948, he had increased the sales volume twelve-fold.\n\nAfter Bernard Rubin's death, his brother William B. Rubin served as president until 1962, when William's daughter Ellen Rubin Gordon took control. As of August 2015, she is chairman and CEO of the company, having succeeded her late husband, Melvin Gordon, who was Chairman and CEO for many years.\n\nTootsie Roll Industries (name adopted in 1966) is one of the largest candy manufacturers in the world. Approximately 64 million Tootsie Rolls are made daily.\n\nAccording to the company website, the original recipe calls for the inclusion of the previous day's batch, a graining process that continues to this day. \"As such, there's (theoretically) a bit of Leo's very first Tootsie Roll in every one of the sixty four million Tootsie Rolls that Tootsie produces each day.\"\n\nDuring the Battle of Chosin Reservoir in 1950, mortar sections under the United States Marine Corps started to run out of mortar rounds. The radio men of these sections started requesting more rounds. There were too many nearby enemy anti-air emplacements however, and the risk that they might lose any airlifted supplies was too great, so they had to wait. After two days of waiting, all the mortar sections ran out of rounds. At this point they accidentally ordered hundreds of crates of Tootsie Roll candies instead of mortar rounds. This was because some elements of the United States military had used \"tootsie rolls\" as code for mortar rounds.\n\nCaptain Tootsie is an advertisement comic strip created for Tootsie Rolls in 1943 by C C Beck, Peter Costanza and Bill Schreider (1950 onwards). It featured the title character Captain Tootsie and his sidekick, a boy named Rollo (a black-haired boy), and three other young cohorts named Fatso (a red-haired boy), Fisty (a blonde boy), and Sweetie (a blonde haired girl). It had stories in the form of full color one-page Sunday strips, black and white daily strips, and two issues of a comic book of the same title released by Toby Press. The advertisement comic was featured by many publishers and in the newspapers. Within the context of the stories, Captain Tootsie was quite strong and quicker to the punch than any of his enemies. His stories were light and \"kid-friendly\". Captain Tootsie's comic strip ads ended in the 1950s.\n\nThe Tootsie Roll jingle, \"Whatever It Is I Think I See,\" was recorded at Blank Tape Studios, New York in 1976. Elements of this ad can occasionally be seen today during advertised children’s programming. It aired on television regularly for more than 20 years, mostly during Saturday morning cartoon programming. The jingle was sung by a nine-year-old, Rebecca Jane Weinstein, and 13-year-old David Johnson, the children of jazz musicians and friends of the song's composer. Originally David was to sing the solo \"Whatever it is I think I see, becomes a Tootsie Roll to me,\" but his voice was changing and cracked on the high notes, so the solo was given to Rebecca. Rebecca still has the original reel-to-reel audio tape recording.\n\nThe current U.S. ingredients of a Tootsie Roll are: sugar, corn syrup, palm oil, condensed skim milk, cocoa, whey, soy lecithin, and artificial and natural flavors.\n\nIn 2009, Tootsie Rolls became certified kosher by the Orthodox Union.\n\nIn addition to the traditional cocoa-flavored Tootsie Roll, several additional flavors have been introduced. Known as Tootsie Fruit Chews, flavors include cherry, orange, vanilla, lemon, and lime. These varieties are wrapped in red, orange, blue, yellow and green wrappers, respectively. Tootsie Frooties come in numerous different fruit flavors including red strawberry, blue raspberry, grape, green apple, banana-berry, smooth cherry, fruit punch, pink lemonade, root beer, cranberry, blueberry, watermelon, and the newest, mango.\n\n"}
{"id": "20096958", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20096958", "title": "Sessility (botany)", "text": "Sessility (botany)\n\nIn botany, sessility (meaning \"sitting\", used in the sense of \"resting on the surface\") is a characteristic of plant parts that have no stalk. Flowers or leaves are borne directly from the stem or peduncle, and thus lack a petiole or pedicel. The leaves of most monocotyledons lack petioles.\n\nThe term sessility is also used in mycology to describe a fungal fruit body that is attached to or seated directly on the surface of the substrate, lacking a supporting stipe or pedicel.\n\nOther examples of sessile flowers include Achyranthus, Saffron, etc.\n\nPlant parts can also be described as subsessile, which is not completely sessile.\n\n"}
{"id": "20102351", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20102351", "title": "Pheasant paste", "text": "Pheasant paste\n\nPheasant paste is a type of pâté made from pheasant meat and other common pâté ingredients such as sour cream, eggs, onions and butter.\n\nJulien Offray de La Mettrie is rumoured to have been killed by indigestion caused by the over-consumption of pheasant paste, however the actual cause was later attributed to self-prescribed blood-letting.\n\n"}
{"id": "20110553", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20110553", "title": "Ethyl gallate", "text": "Ethyl gallate\n\nEthyl gallate is a food additive with E number E313. It is the ethyl ester of gallic acid. Ethyl gallate is added to food as an antioxidant.\n\nThough found naturally in a variety of plant sources including walnuts \"Terminalia myriocarpa\" or chebulic myrobolan (\"Terminalia chebula\"), ethyl gallate is produced from gallic acid and ethanol. It can be found in wine.\n\n"}
{"id": "20111193", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20111193", "title": "Pumpkin pie", "text": "Pumpkin pie\n\nPumpkin pie is a dessert pie with a spiced, pumpkin-based custard filling. The pumpkin is a symbol of harvest time, and pumpkin pie is often eaten during the fall and early winter. In the United States and Canada, it is usually prepared for Thanksgiving, and other occasions when pumpkin is in season.\n\nThe pie filling ranges in color from orange to brown, and is baked in a single pie shell, rarely with a top crust. The pie is generally flavored with cinnamon, powdered ginger, nutmeg, and cloves. Allspice is also commonly used and can replace the clove and nutmeg, as its flavor is similar to both combined. Cardamom and vanilla are also sometimes used as batter spices. The spice mixture is called pumpkin pie spice.\n\nThe pie is often made from canned pumpkin or packaged pumpkin pie filling (spices included), mainly from varieties of \"Cucurbita moschata.'\n\nPies made from pumpkins use pie pumpkins which measure about six to eight inches in diameter. They are considerably smaller than jack o'lanterns. The first step for getting the edible part out of the pumpkin is to slice it in half and remove the seeds. The two halves are heated until soft, in an oven, over an open fire, on a stove top, or in a microwave oven. Sometimes the pumpkin halves are brined to soften the pulp instead of being cooked. At this point the pulp is scooped out and puréed.\n\nThe pulp is mixed with eggs, evaporated and/or sweetened condensed milk, sugar, and a spice mixture called pumpkin pie spice, which includes nutmeg and other spices (e.g., ginger, cinnamon, cloves, allspice, mace), then baked in a pie shell. Similar pies are made with butternut squash or sweet potato fillings.\n\nThe pumpkin is native to the continent of North America. The pumpkin was an early export to France; from there it was introduced to Tudor England, and the flesh of the \"pompion\" was quickly accepted as pie filler. During the seventeenth century, pumpkin pie recipes could be found in English cookbooks, such as Hannah Woolley's \"The Gentlewoman's Companion\" (1675). Pumpkin \"pies\" made by early American colonists were more likely to be a savory soup made and served in a pumpkin than a sweet custard in a crust.\n\nIt was not until the early nineteenth century that the recipes appeared in American cookbooks or pumpkin pie became a common addition to the Thanksgiving dinner. The Pilgrims brought the pumpkin pie back to New England, while the English method of cooking the pumpkin took a different course. In the 19th century, the English pumpkin pie was prepared by stuffing the pumpkin with apples, spices, and sugar and then baking it whole. In the United States after the Civil War, the pumpkin pie was resisted in southern states as a symbol of Yankee culture imposed on the south, where there was no tradition of eating pumpkin pie. Many southern cooks instead made sweet potato pie, or added bourbon and pecans to give a southern touch.\n\nToday, throughout much of the United States, it is traditional to serve pumpkin pie after Thanksgiving dinner. Additionally, many modern companies produce seasonal pumpkin pie-flavored products such as candy, cheesecake, coffee, ice cream, french toast, waffles and pancakes, and many breweries produce a seasonal pumpkin ale or beer; these are generally not flavored with pumpkins, but rather pumpkin pie spices. Commercially made pumpkin pie mix is made from \"Cucurbita pepo\", \"Cucurbita maxima\", and \"Cucurbita moschata\" (Libbey Select uses the Select Dickinson Pumpkin variety of \"C. moschata\" for its canned pumpkins).\n\nPumpkin pies were briefly discouraged from Thanksgiving dinners in 1947 as part of a rationing campaign, mainly because of the eggs in the recipe.\n\n\n\n\nThe world's largest pumpkin pie was made in New Bremen, Ohio, at the New Bremen Pumpkinfest. It was created on September 25, 2010. The pie consisted of 1,212 pounds of canned pumpkin, 109 gallons of evaporated milk, 2,796 eggs, 7 pounds of salt, 14.5 pounds of cinnamon, and 525 pounds of sugar. The final pie weighed and measured in diameter.\n\n"}
{"id": "20133091", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20133091", "title": "Pollo a la Brasa", "text": "Pollo a la Brasa\n\nPollo a la brasa, also known as blackened chicken or rotisserie chicken in the United States and charcoal chicken in Australia, is a common dish of Peruvian cuisine and one of the most consumed in Peru, along with ceviche, papa a la huancaina, salchipapa, and chifa. The dish originated in the city of Lima in the 1950s. It is also popular in Colombian and Brazilian cuisine. \n\nIt is a rotisserie chicken dish that is a Peruvian version of \"pollo al spiedo\" It was developed in Peru c. the 1950s by Roger Schuler and Franz Ulrich, who were Swiss residents in the country. Schuler was in the hotel business in Peru. He devised the specific method of cooking the chicken, observing his cook's technique in preparation, and gradually, along with his business partners, perfected the recipe, creating the Granja Azul restaurant in Santa Clara, district of Ate, in Lima.\n\nOriginally its consumption was specific to the wealthy people (during the 1950s until the 1970s), but today it is widely available and a typical plate of chicken with fries and a salad can be bought for about 15 soles, or just under $5. The original version consisted of a chicken (cooked in charcoal and marinated only with salt) served with large french fries and traditionally eaten with the fingers, without cutlery, although most modern Peruvians will eat it with a fork and knife. It is almost always served with creamy (mayonnaise-based) sauces, and most frequently with a salsa known as ají. In restaurants all over the United States like in Perú, pollo a la brasa is served with a portion of french fries, salad with a homemade ranch sauce, and a variety of sauces depending on the restaurants. They typically range from $8 ( of a chicken), $12 ( of a chicken), and $16 and above for a whole chicken.\n\nPeruvian cuisine was listed among the top three of the United States' most popular foods in 2013. Pollo a la brasa can now be found in eateries all throughout the U.S. and is considered to be a staple item on the menu of Peruvian/American fusion restaurants.\n\n"}
{"id": "20144230", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20144230", "title": "Rock cake", "text": "Rock cake\n\nA rock cake, also called a rock bun, is a small fruit cake with a rough surface resembling a rock.\n\nRock cakes originated in Great Britain, where they are a traditional teatime treat, but are now popular in many parts of the world. They were promoted by the Ministry of Food during the Second World War since they require fewer eggs and less sugar than ordinary cakes, an important savings in a time of strict rationing. Traditional recipes bulked them with oatmeal, which was more readily available than white flour.\n\nA typical modern recipe for 12 cakes requires about 200 g of flour, 100 g of butter or margarine, 50 g of sugar, 1 beaten egg, 1 teaspoon of baking powder, 2 tablespoons of milk, 150 g of dried fruit such as currants, raisins, candied orange peel, etc., and a pinch of nutmeg and mixed spices. Usually, flour and butter are first mixed until the mixture resembles breadcrumbs; then the other ingredients are added to create a stiff dough, which is dropped from a spoon to a baking tray or roughly formed with two forks. The cakes (optionally sprinkled with sugar and cinnamon) are baked for about 15 minutes at 200 °C, retaining an uneven form and contour.\n\nVariations include the Jamaican rock bun, which is similar but can include grated coconut, and the traditional British rock cake, which contains oatmeal.\n\nRock cakes are mentioned as an alternative to doughnuts in the 1940 British film \"Night Train to Munich\". They are also a common feature in the popular \"Harry Potter\" series of books and films. In the Benny Hill song \"Ernie (The Fastest Milkman in the West)\", Ernie is killed by a rock cake below the heart and a pork pie to the face. In the British soap opera \"EastEnders\", rock cakes are stocked in the local cafe, and Tamwar Masood frequently eats them as an alternative to pastries.\n\nEarly in \"The African Queen\", Mr. Allnut (Humphrey Bogart) is offered a rock cake while at tea. Detective Alan Grant is offered rock buns in Josephine Tey's novel, \"The Daughter of Time\". Rock cakes are also referred to in an early scene in the 1939 movie, \"Goodbye Mr. Chips\". Agatha Christie mentions them more than once in her stories and novels, including \"Three Blind Mice\" and \"The Murder at the Vicarage\". In \"Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone\", Hagrid serves them at tea to Harry and Ron.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "20145799", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20145799", "title": "East Glacier Ranger Station Historic District", "text": "East Glacier Ranger Station Historic District\n\nThe East Glacier Ranger Station in Glacier National Park is characteristic of park buildings constructed in the 1920s and 1930s. It was designed by Daniel Ray Hull of the National Park Service Office of Plans, as a frame building compatible in style with the prevailing National Park Service Rustic style. It is the center of a group of related buildings, including several residential structures.\n\nEast Glacier, Montana was an arrival point for tourists arriving by rail in the park. Until the 1920 completion of US 2 and the Going-to-the-Sun Road, the east side of the park was isolated from the headquarters at West Glacier. The new ranger station complex at East Glacier was proposed to provide administrative services to the east side. In 1937, with the completion of the Going-to-the-Sun Road the more convenient Saint Mary Ranger Station took over maintenance duties, and four buildings at East Glacier were demolished by Civilian Conservation Corps workers.\n"}
{"id": "20149964", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20149964", "title": "Egg waffle", "text": "Egg waffle\n\nAn egg waffle is a spherical egg-based waffle popular in Hong Kong and Macau, and is an eggy leavened batter cooked between two plates of semi-spherical cells. They are usually served hot, and often eaten plain, although they may be served with fruit and flavours such as strawberry, coconut or chocolate. It is referred to by its original Cantonese name, gai daan jai (鷄蛋仔), and in English, an egg puff, bubble waffle, eggette, pancake balls, pancake waffle, egglet, and puffle. They are sometimes referred to as Hong Kong cakes in Chinatowns across America, especially in New York. One piece of egg waffle can have around 20 to 35 small round 'balls'.\n\nEgg waffles are among the most popular Hong Kong \"street snacks\" and were ranked No.1 in a 100 most popular HK street snack listing. They have been a favoured street snack since their emergence in the 1950s, when they were made with coal fire heating and sold from street kiosks in Hong Kong.\n\nThe origins of the egg waffle or \"gai daan jai\" (which literally translates to \"little chicken egg\") are unknown, despite being ingrained in the memories of Hong Kong residents young and old. One story says the enterprising post-war generation created the egg-shaped mold to make up for an eggless batter, as eggs used to be a luxury. Another tale points to street hawkers who bought damaged eggs on the cheap to work them into a batter, resulting in the classic golden color of the cake. It also is reasonable to suggest that the special iron skillet used to mold the \"gai daan tsai\" is a Hong Kong take on the traditional checkered European waffle press. Today, the two related snacks are often sold by the same stall.\" There is also another tale that it originated from 1950s, a sundry shop owner did not want to waste broken eggs and tried to add flour, butter etc. and baked in a mold. However, In 1944, Mr Cheung,the founder of a food stall, he using cart to sell daan jai kau which is predecessor of egg waffle. Daan Jai Kau is bigger than egg waffle and it is also divided into 30 piece for selling by the hawkers.\n\nEgg waffles are made from a sweet, egg-rich batter that is cooked on a hot griddle, a special frying pan with small round cells (resembling an æbleskiver pan but with a higher number of smaller round cells). The griddle is set on hot coals in the fire, or more commonly on an electrical heater. The batter is poured over the special frying pan and heated; the small ovals of egg waffles are thus formed. The crucial key to prepare a crispy egg waffle is to turn over the pan quickly after the batter is poured into the hot frying pan. This could create an egg waffle that is crispy on top, and cake-like on the bottom. In addition to the conventional \"egg taste\", they are also available in a variety of flavours such as chocolate, green-tea, ginger, etc. Most batters used in egg waffle are quick breads, although some are also made using a yeast-raised or fermented batter. Egg waffles can be eaten at different times of the day, depending on local tradition.\n\nEgg waffles nowadays are being reinvented. Besides the traditional egg waffle, it is common to see them in a variety of flavours such as green tea, chocolate, cheese or purple sweet potato. Egg waffles are also often paired with different desserts like ice cream.\n\n"}
{"id": "20160389", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20160389", "title": "Borjomi (water)", "text": "Borjomi (water)\n\nBorjomi (, often russified as Боржом, \"Borzhom\") is a brand of naturally carbonated mineral water from springs in the Borjomi Gorge of central Georgia. The artesian springs in the valley are fed by water that filters from glaciers covering the peaks of the Bakuriani mountains at altitudes of up to . The water rises to the surface without pumping and is transported by pipes to two bottling plants in the town of Borjomi.\n\nThe Borjomi springs were discovered by the Imperial Russian military in the 1820s. They were made famous throughout the Russian Empire, making Borjomi a popular tourist destination. The history of the brand is closely associated with the Russian imperial dynasty of Romanov. By the 1890s, Borjomi was bottled in the Georgian estates of Grand Duke Mikhail of Russia. After the Russian Revolution of 1917 and subsequent Soviet takeover of Georgia, the Borjomi enterprise was nationalized and the water was made into a top Soviet export.\n\nBorjomi is exported to over 40 countries. A majority stake in Borjomi’s parent company, IDS Borjomi, was sold by the Georgian businesswoman Inna Gudavadze to Russia’s Alfa Group in January 2013. In 2012 the company was valued by Forbes magazine at $500m. Inna and her family retain a substantial interest in the business. \n\nThe use of Borjomi water has been suggested by the Georgian and Russian researchers for complex treatment of several digestive diseases and diabetes mellitus.\n\nThe mineral springs of the Borjomi valley were discovered over one thousand years ago. Seven large rock tubs discovered by archeologists dating back to the beginning of the 7th century attest to the availability and use of the spring waters, most likely for bathing purposes. The springs were abandoned before being rediscovered in the early 19th century. By that time, as a result of the incessant warfare, Borjomi and its environs had been depopulated and covered with impassable forests.\n\nIn 1829, when the Imperial Russian Army Kherson Grenadier Regiment was deployed in Borjomi for operations against the Ottoman Empire, Russian soldiers found mineral springs on the right bank of Borjomi river. Intrigued by the find, Colonel Pavel Popov, the commander of the regiment, ordered that the springs be cleaned and that the water be bottled and transported to the military base. Popov, who suffered from stomach disease tried the water first. Seeing positive results, he ordered the construction of rock walls around the spring and he had a bath house built nearby, along with a small cottage house for himself. In 1837, when the Kherson regiment was replaced by the Georgian grenadiers regiment, its medical doctor Amirov examined the water components and their effects, sending the first results of analysis to Saint Petersburg and Moscow. By 1841, the healing effects of Borjomi water were so famous that the viceroy of the Russian Tsar in the Caucasus Yevgeni Golovin brought his sick daughter to the springs for treatment. In light of the quick results of the treatment, he called the first spring \"Yekaterinsky\" () after his daughter Yekaterina and the second \"Yevgeniyevsky\" (Евгеньевский) after himself.\n\nGolovin also expedited the official transfer of the waters from the military to civil authorities. In 1850, a mineral water park was opened in Borjomi and in 1854, the authorities commissioned construction of the first bottling plant. Borjomi water gained popularity for its curing effects all over the Russian Empire and the government began building palaces, parks, public gardens and hotels to accommodate incoming tourists and patients. The commute from Tiflis to Borjomi usually took 8–9 hours by phaetons, however the new Mikhaylovo-Borjomi railroad built in 1894 significantly reduced the length of the journey. Renowned figures such as Anton Chekhov, Pyotr Tchaikovsky as well as members of the royal Russian family were among the common visitors of the springs. By that time, Borjomi was a rival of similar European spas, such as Vichy, frequented by Russian tourists, the fact that earned for Borjomi the reputation of \"the Russian Vichy\" and \"the pearl of the Caucasus\".\nIn 1894, Grand Duke Mikhail Romanov built a bottling plant in the Borjomi park which continued to operate until the 1950s. A glass factory followed in 1896. The income from the Borjomi waters enterprise contributed to the wealth of Mikhail's son and successor Nikolay, who was the richest of all Russian grand dukes by 1914. In 1854, 1,350 bottles of water were produced, by 1905 the number had reached 320,000 and by 1913 over 9 million bottles were sold. After the establishment of Soviet rule in Georgia, Borjomi was widely sold around the Soviet Union and was favored by Soviet leaders such as Joseph Stalin. Exploration of the Borjomi Gorge was conducted in 1927. Between then and 1982, 57 exploration wells (depths ranging from to ) were drilled. In 1961, 423,000 bottles of \"Borjomi\" was exported to 15 countries including the United States, France and Austria. During the existence of the Soviet Union, Borjomi was recognized as the third best known brand of the USSR after the Volga car and Aeroflot airlines. In the 1980s, annual production of Borjomi water reached 400 million bottles. \nProduction slowed down with the collapse of the Soviet Union and economic stagnation in the independent Republic of Georgia. In 1995, bottling of Borjomi was restarted by the Georgian Glass and Mineral Waters Company (GG&MW), which increased the production forty-fold. According to the company, 80% of Borjomi produced that year was exported abroad—more than half of this amount to Russia. Despite counterfeit drinks being produced under the Borjomi label as a result of rising piracy during the 1990s, Borjomi water was able to reclaim its reputation by 2000 in a distinctive packaging campaign. The piracy also slowed down due to the 1998 Russian financial crisis.\n\nIn May 2006, Russia banned imports of the Georgian mineral waters, declaring them unsafe. The ban got lifted after 7 years in 2013. Georgia viewed this as an attempt to restrict access to the Russian market and making Borjomi a pawn in post-Soviet political power play. As a result of the ban, GG&MW lost GEL 25 million in 2006, but the company declared the crisis to have been overcome by 2008, with sales volumes reaching pre-2006 level. The sales and export of Borjomi mineral water dropped again by 30-40% starting from October 2008 due to the global financial crisis. But already in 2010 the company declared that sales figures of Borjomi were the same as the company had before the ban. In 2011 sales company sold 15% more Borjomi than they were selling before the ban. Today Borjomi is sold in 40 countries worldwide. Today, Borjomi in post-soviet countries is a number one brand in imported mineral water brand segment.\n\nBorjomi is a water of volcanic origin which is over 1,500 years old. It is pushed up to the surface from 1500m below ground by natural carbon dioxide pressure. Borjomi does not cool down before it reaches the surface and comes out at a temperature of . The Borjomi springs are located in the central part of the Adjara-Imereti mountain range of Greater Caucasus at an altitude of above sea level. The average depth of each of the nine spring wells is .\n\nIn order to preserve the mineral composition of the springs, in 2006 the Georgian Ministry of Environment Protection and Natural Resources approved a production plan for 2006–2031 estimating 561,000 litres per day which allows bottling of over 1 million bottles a day using 10 wells in Borjomi Gorge. The wells are located in 3 exploitation lots: Central (in the vicinity of Borjomi town), Likani (in Likani village) and Vashlovani-Kvibisi (in villages Vashlovani and Kvibisi). The water received from the wells travels by a stainless steel pipeline to two bottling plants where it is cooled and bottled. The first plant specializes in glass bottling, the second in PET bottling.\n\nThe production of mineral water and the associated tourist economy in Borjomi and the nearby Borjomi-Kharagauli National Park make up 10 percent of Georgia's export trade. Construction of the Baku-Tbilisi-Ceyhan oil pipeline near the Borjomi has been controversial because of potential negative environmental and economic impacts on the region.\n\nBorjomi comes in glass bottle sizes of 0.33 and 0.5 litres and plastic bottle sizes of 0.5 litre and 1 litres. Both types of bottles are screw-capped. The signature greenish color of the glass bottles (so-called \"Georgian Green\") is based on a proprietary formula. \nIn February 2011, new packaging of Borjomi water presenting a new and more sophisticated modern look was introduced, accentuating relief of the deer image and sign of the manufacturer on the label. More than 40 countries, including Ukraine, Israel, the United States, Czech Republic, Poland, Bulgaria, Cyprus, Canada, Austria, Turkey, Japan, Spain, Belgium, the Netherlands, Greece, Australia, the United Arab Emirates, the United Kingdom and South Korea, will get Borjomi in newly designed bottles.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "20216098", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20216098", "title": "Cốm", "text": "Cốm\n\nCốm, or green rice, is a dish in Vietnamese cuisine. It is not dyed green, as can be done with pandan, but is immature rice kernels roasted over very low heat then pounded in a mortar and pestle until flattened. Cốm is seasonal dish associated with autumn. It can be eaten plain or with coconut. The taste is slightly sweet with a nutty flavor. It is a popular seasonal dessert across Vietnam, especially in Northern delta food cuisine.\n\nA traditional pastry, Bánh Cốm (green rice cake) is made using cốm with mung bean filling. Cốm is often offered to worship the ancestors in the Mid Autumn Festival. The green rice can also be used in sweet soup, Chè Cốm. Cốm is called com dep among the Khmer people. A similar dessert is known as \"pinipig\" in the Philippines.\n\nCốm is produced by two famous villages in Hanoi, Vong and Me Tri village\n\n"}
{"id": "20220524", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20220524", "title": "Toriten", "text": "Toriten\n\nToriten is a Japanese Tempura style fried chicken. It is an original food in Ōita Prefecture, and very popular there.\nAny part of the chicken can be used. The meat is cut into nuggets, dipped in soy sauce, sake and garlic powder, rolled in tempura powder and deep fried. Toriten is commonly served with fresh greens, and eaten hot immediately after frying. The most common sauce is Ponzu sauce (made with Soy sauce and vinegar) with mustard.\nIn Oita, it is also popular to use Kabosu as source. \n\nAccording to Oita city, Toriten was invented by a restaurant in Oita city. \nHowever, there is another opinion that TOYO-KEN which is a restaurant in Beppu city started Toriten first. \n\n\n"}
{"id": "20222160", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20222160", "title": "Sherbet (powder)", "text": "Sherbet (powder)\n\nSherbet is a fizzy powder sweet, usually eaten by dipping a lollipop or liquorice, or licking it on a finger.\n\nThe word \"sherbet\" is from Turkish \"\", which is from Persian , which in turn comes from \"sharbat\", Arabic \"sharbah\", \"a drink\", from \"shariba\" \"to drink\". Also called \"sorbet\", which comes from French \"sorbet\", from Italian \"sorbetto\" and in turn from Turkish \"şerbet\". The word is cognate to syrup in English. Historically it was a cool effervescent or iced fruit soft drink. The meaning, spelling and pronunciation have fractured between different countries. It is usually spelled \"sherbet\", but a common pronunciation changes this to \"sherbert\".\n\nIt is not to be confused with the North American \"sherbet\", which is a variant of the iced dessert sorbet.\n\nBeginning with the 19th century sherbet powder (soda powder) became popular. \"Put a spoonful of the powder in a cup of water, mix it and drink it as soon as possible, during the time of sparkling. ... Because this way the most of acid of air is lost ... it is more practicable to put the powder into the mouth and flush it with some water.\" 2 g of sodium bicarbonate and 1.5 g of tartaric acid were separately packed in little coloured paper bags.\n\nSherbet used to be stirred into various beverages to make effervescing drinks, in a similar way to making lemonade from \"lemonade powders\", before canned carbonated drinks became ubiquitous. Sherbet is now used to mean this powder sold as a sweet. (In the United States, it would be somewhat comparable to the powder in Pixy Stix or Fun Dip, though having the fizzy quality of effervescing candy, such as Pop Rocks.)\n\nSherbet in the United Kingdom and other Commonwealth countries is a fizzy powder, containing sugar and flavouring, and an edible acid and base. The acid may be tartaric, citric or malic acid, and the base may be sodium bicarbonate, sodium carbonate, magnesium carbonate, or a mixture of these and/or other similar carbonates . To this is added a large amount of sugar to mask the unappetising flavour of the reactive powders, icing sugar, and fruit or cream soda flavouring.The acid-carbonate reaction occurs upon presence of moisture (juice/saliva), becoming \"fizzy\".\n\nSherbet can be sold by itself or used as a decorative agent on other sweets. The measured qualities of sherbet include granularity, colour, \"zing\" (acidity) and flavouring (normally a citrus fruit).\n\nBarratt's \"Sherbet Fountain\" consists of sherbet and a stick made from liquorice, and has been sold since 1925. The original concept of the Sherbert Fountain was sold to Barratt’s by Henry Edward Brunt and was rebranded under their name. In 2009 a plastic tube with twist-off lid replaced the traditional paper packaging with the liquorice stick poking through the end, much to the fury of the traditionalist \"Daily Mail\" newspaper.\n\nIn the traditional paper packaging, the top of the stick was intended to be bitten off to form a straw and the sherbet sucked through it, where it fizzes and dissolves on the tongue. The \"new\" format only includes a solid liquorice stick, so the sherbet must be licked off that, or eaten directly. This method of consumption was also considered acceptable with the original packaging. This is advertised on the packet as \"Sherbet with a liquorice dip\".\n\nSherbet dips or Sherbet Dabs are also popular, such as the Dip Dab by Barratt. They consist of a small packet of sherbet, with a lollipop sealed into the bag. Once the lollipop has been licked, it can be dipped into the sherbet and then sucked clean, alternatively it can simply be used to shovel the sherbet into the mouth.\n\nFlying saucers are small dimpled discs of edible coloured paper (rice paper), typically filled with white unflavoured sherbet (the same form as in Sherbet Fountains). The first flying saucers were produced in the 1950s.\n\nSherbet has been used in parts of both the UK and Australia as slang for an alcoholic drink, especially beer. This use is noted in a slang dictionary as early as 1890, and still appears in list of slang terms written today (especially lists of Australian slang). \"We're heading to the pub for a few sherbets.\" – … pints of beer.\"\n\n\n"}
{"id": "20224427", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20224427", "title": "Moustalevria", "text": "Moustalevria\n\nMustalevria () is a traditional Greek kind of pudding made of grape must mixed with flour and boiled until thick.\n\nMoustalevria originated in ancient Greece where it was known under the name \"oinouta\" (). During the Byzantine era it was called \"mustopita\" () or \"pastellos\" (). Nowadays except from its standard name, moustalevria has alternative names that differ from place to place. E.g., it is also known as kefteria in Crete, kourkouta in Samos, palouzes in Cyprus and mustopita in other regions.\n\nIn order to produce mustalevria grape must (the juice from pressed grapes before fermentation and is often used as a sweetener in traditional bread recipes, as well as in the preparation of desserts and candy) is boiled in low fire. Then a small amount of argil is added in order to clean the must. After the boil, ingredients like flour, sugar, semolina, petimezi, sesame, vanilla, almonds, walnuts etc are included. Mustalevria is a favorite, especially popular at grape harvest season when the must is fresh.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "20249181", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20249181", "title": "Bissli", "text": "Bissli\n\nBissli (, \"Bisli\") is an Israeli wheat snack produced by Nestle-owned Osem. Bissli is Osem's leading snack brand after Bamba.\n\nOver 4,000 tons of Bissli are produced each year in an array of shapes and flavors. Bissli is a crunchy snack that is made with fried pasta. The name is a combination of the Yiddish word \"Bis\", meaning \"bite\", and the Hebrew word \"li\", meaning \"for me\".\n\nThe most popular flavors are \"Grill\" and \"Barbecue\". Other flavors include onion, smoky, pizza, falafel, taco, hamburger, Za'atar and Shawarma, Olive. Each flavor is shaped differently: the pizza flavored snacks are shaped like squares, the onion flavor like small hoops, and the smoky flavor like small hollow tubes.\n\nDescribed by the manufacturer as a uniquely Israeli product, Bissli is produced in five factories around Israel. It was first sold in 1970.\n\n"}
{"id": "20266749", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20266749", "title": "Tlačenka", "text": "Tlačenka\n\nTlačenka is the Czech and Slovak variety of head cheese similar to Polish \"salceson\". Czech light-colored \"tlačenka\" is made in a number of types. It is generally bonded with brawn - thick pigskin and hock/trotters broth - with various combinations of meat cutoffs (i.e. knuckle, head), offal (tongue, heart, liver) and fat with seasoning (salt and various combinations of spices - marjoram, garlic, caraway, pepper, cloves, allspice, etc.). Another version - dark-colored \"tlačenka\" - is made with added blood.\n"}
{"id": "20287188", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20287188", "title": "Halloween on Franklin Street", "text": "Halloween on Franklin Street\n\nHalloween on Franklin Street is a yearly tradition in Chapel Hill, North Carolina, that encompasses a massive gathering on Franklin Street, the cultural hub of the town. The Halloween celebration began in the early 1980s as a considerably smaller event, involving Chapel Hill residents and college students from The University of North Carolina. Attendees of the event dress up in creative Halloween costumes and walk up and down Franklin Street celebrating the holiday. Since its beginnings, the event had grown in size every year until 2008. Although not sponsored by the Town of Chapel Hill, the celebration has become an attraction for visitors from across the South. Between 2004 and 2007, it was estimated that about 80,000 people converged on Franklin Street for the event, while Chapel Hill is estimated to have a population of 54,492 as listed in the 2007 census, evidence of the number of people who make the trip to Chapel Hill to attend. Because of the size of the celebration, the Town of Chapel Hill closes Franklin Street to all vehicular traffic and prohibits parking anywhere near downtown. Along with the big crowds come safety issues, with some of the biggest concerns being alcohol poisoning and gang-related violence. To deal with these issues, hundreds of police officers patrol the downtown area throughout the entire night. In 2007, approximately 400 police officers were deployed to Franklin Street to ensure that nothing got out of hand. In 2008, the Town of Chapel Hill implemented new measures to attempt to cut down on the size of the Halloween celebration in an action dubbed \"Homegrown Halloween\" to reduce the crowd size and discourage people from out of town to come to Chapel Hill. The shuttle service that had formerly transported people from park and ride lots to Franklin Street was shut down and the results of Chapel Hill's efforts showed when about 35,000 people showed up for the event.\n\nAmong the alternatives to the traditional Franklin Street celebration are the Halloween-themed planetarium shows at Morehead Planetarium and Science Center , which include two versions of \"Scare-o-lina Skies\", one for families with school-age children and one for adults and older teens. The planetarium closes by mid-afternoon on Halloween because the adjacent parking lot becomes a staging area for public safety vehicles serving the Franklin Street nighttime celebration.\n\nFor the Town of Chapel Hill, one of the biggest concerns during the event is safety. With crowds of up to 80,000 people, security measures can be difficult to implement, with two of the biggest issues being binge drinking and gang-related activities. Although the celebration is not a town-sponsored event, on average, officials call for around 400 law enforcement officers to control crowds and patrol the streets. During the 2008 celebration, along with other new security measures, officials required bars and restaurants in the downtown area to stop selling alcohol and close their doors at 1:00 a.m. Another action taken by town officials meant to help curb drinking was that of requiring all bars in the downtown area to charge patrons a five-dollar cover charge to get in. Police began clearing the streets at midnight and made only five arrests throughout the event, down from thirteen arrests at the 2007 celebration.\n\n\nOne of the most popular elements of Halloween on Franklin Street is the originality of the costumes of attendees. People that attend this event (including many students from The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill) strive for the most unusual costumes possible. Notable costumes from the 2008 celebration included the Joker from the popular 2008 Batman movie, The Dark Knight, and a \"Tetris\"-themed group costume. According to the UNC-based student newspaper, \"The Daily Tar Heel\", for students, \"Halloween is an opportunity to express their creativity and become a different person for one night\".\n"}
{"id": "20287633", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20287633", "title": "Popeseye steak", "text": "Popeseye steak\n\nPopeseye steak is thinly sliced rump steak, originating in Scotland and available in the United Kingdom.\n\nThe etymology of the term \"popeseye steak\" is twofold:\n\nOne first begins with a cut of rump steak. Then, thinly slice the rump steak across the widest face of the rump steak (shown as the top of the steak in the illustration). Slice width varies; one Scotch Beef butcher sells slices that \"typically weigh around 6oz\" each.\n\nPopeseye steak is very tender, and, due to its relative thinness compared to other steaks, cooks quickly, particularly if used as a pan frying steak. Cooking of this cut should stop as soon as it is brown on each side.\n\nThese steaks can be enjoyed as follows:\n\n"}
{"id": "20298930", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20298930", "title": "Glorified rice", "text": "Glorified rice\n\nGlorified rice is a dessert salad served in Minnesota and other states in the Upper Midwest, and other places with Norwegians. It is popular in more rural areas with sizable Lutheran populations of Scandinavian heritage. It is made from rice, crushed pineapple, and whipped cream. It is often decorated with maraschino cherries.\n\nThe long-established recipe has been the subject of many newspaper articles. In 1995, Janet Letnes Martin and Suzann Nelson authored a humorous book comparing Lutheran and Catholic traditions called \"They Glorified Mary…We Glorified Rice: A Catholic-Lutheran Lexicon\". The book includes a recipe for glorified rice. The dish is also included in the title of Carrie Young's \"Prairie Cooks: Glorified Rice, Three-Day Buns, and Other Recipes and Reminiscences\". Glorified rice often turns up at potlucks and church picnics.\n\n"}
{"id": "20317920", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20317920", "title": "Poulet au fromage", "text": "Poulet au fromage\n\nPoulet au fromage () is a French dish: the English translation being \"\"chicken with cheese\"\". \n\nPieces of chicken are coated with flour, salt and pepper, and then sautéed. Some recipes call for various types of cooking oil, some call for butter, and some call for both. Some recipes call for sauteing an onion with the chicken. After the chicken is browned, white wine is added to the cooking pan. Some recipes call for leaving the chicken in the pan while the wine is reduced, while others call for first removing the chicken, then using the wine to deglaze the pan, and then pouring the wine sauce over the chicken.\n\nThe chicken and wine, combined in a dish, are then baked, after which a sauce made of cheese (often Emmenthal or Gruyère or both), egg yolks, and crème fraîche is poured over it. The sauce often contains a sprinkle of nutmeg, a pinch of thyme, parsley, garlic, or a bay leaf.\n\nSome recipes call for garnishment with capers, and /or flavoring using lardons.\n\nPoulet au Fromage is served with white wine, and often bread and salad.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "20325528", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20325528", "title": "Franzbrötchen", "text": "Franzbrötchen\n\nA Franzbrötchen () is a small, sweet pastry, baked with butter and cinnamon. Sometimes other ingredients are used as well, such as chocolate or raisins. It is a type of pastry commonly found in northern Germany, especially Hamburg, and it is usually served for breakfast, but is also enjoyed along with coffee and cake. As its name indicates, the Franzbrötchen was probably inspired by French pastries. Originally, it could be found only in the region of Hamburg, but now Franzbrötchen are also sold in Bremen, Berlin and other German cities.\n\nThe ingredients of the dough include flour, butter, yeast, milk, sugar, and a pinch of salt. The filling is a mixture of sugar and cinnamon. Several times in succession, the dough is folded and rolled out thinly, and coated with butter. As soon as the dough is sufficiently outstretched to a filmy layer, it is moistened with a little water, sprinkled with a melange of sugar and cinnamon and finally rolled up. In order to provide the filled dough roll with the typical shape of a Franzbrötchen, it has to be cut into slices, each about four centimetres thick. Afterwards, the pieces are pressed together in the middle of the cut faces with the handle of a wooden spoon, which causes the filling to ooze out sideways. On baking, the yeast dough rises and the melange of sugar and cinnamon is slightly caramelized on the outside of the layers. Due to the butter and the caramelized sugar, the Franzbrötchen is often a little sticky. Variants of the Franzbrötchen may contain raisins, seeds, chocolate sprinkles or pumpkin seeds.\n\nThe Franzbrötchen was probably named in the style of the French (German 'französisch') model, the croissant, which is also made of pastry and became popular in Germany after Napoleon's troops had occupied Hamburg between 1806 and 1814. According to a different historical tradition, they produced a longish Franzbrot (German for 'French bread') which resembled the baguette. Legend has it, a baker in Hamburg had once seared such a Franzbrot in a pan of fat, which is considered the origin of the contemporary Franzbrötchen.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "20351533", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20351533", "title": "Mujigae-tteok", "text": "Mujigae-tteok\n\nMujigae-tteok () or rainbow rice cake is a layered \"tteok\" (rice cake) of different colors resembling a rainbow. It is used for special occasions such as a banquet, party, or feast like \"doljanchi\" (first birthday), \"hwangapjanchi\" (60th birthday). Alternative names for \"mujigae-tteok\" include saektteok () and saekpyeon (), both of which means \"colored rice cakes\".\n\nThe addition of food coloring makes \"mujigae-tteok\" different from the other varieties of \"seolgi-tteok\", such as white \"baek-seolgi\". It is made by steaming sweetened non-glutinous rice flour in a \"siru\" (steamer). Sweetened rice flour is made by first grinding soaked rice and mixing it with honey or sugar solution. The flour is then rubbed between the palms for uniform mixing of the ingredients and finally sieved. Food colorings, commonly gardenia (yellow), rock tripe powder (grey), mugwort powder (green), and devil's-tongue powder (pink), are then added and mixed with small amount of water. Colored and white (uncolored) rice flour are then laid on a cloth-lined \"siru\" in about thick layers and steamed.\n\n"}
{"id": "20359091", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20359091", "title": "Curry pie", "text": "Curry pie\n\nA curry pie is a pastry dish. It is a traditional pie filled with either Indian or Chinese curry. Curry pie is a popular pub meal in the United Kingdom and can also be purchased frozen from supermarkets and as a ready to eat meal from take-aways. Curry pie is sometimes accompanied by chips.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "20366719", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20366719", "title": "Cuban pastry", "text": "Cuban pastry\n\nCuban pastries (known in Spanish as pasteles or pastelitos) are baked puff pastry-type pastries filled with sweet or savory fillings.\n\nTraditional fillings include cream cheese \"quesitos\", guava (\"pastelito de guayaba\") and cheese, pineapple, and coconut. The sweet fillings are made with sweetened fruit pulps. The cream cheese filling is also a slightly sweetened version of cream cheese, that resembles the flavor and texture of a cheesecake. The savory fillings are usually beef, but sometimes chicken or ham and cheese are used. The beef fillings consist of a seasoned but not spicy meat, made in a tomato-based sauce. It is typical to include raisins and green olives as part of the meat filling. It is also typical for a sweet glaze to be applied to the top of even savory fillings.\n\nThe pastries are typically consumed at any time as a snack. In Miami, one can find many \"window cafeterias\" with customers having a \"pastelito\" with coffee throughout the day.\n\nThey can be found at many Hispanic cafeterias and have also been introduced into the American retail market by Goya Foods. The pastries are also available in wholesale for the foodservice industry by several companies including Hispanic wholesale frozen bakery manufacturer \"Latin Flavors\".\n\n"}
{"id": "20370974", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20370974", "title": "Liangpi", "text": "Liangpi\n\nLiangpi () is a noodle-like Chinese dish made from wheat or rice flour. It is a specialty dish originating from the cuisine of Shaanxi Province, but has now spread to many other places in China, in particular the northern and central regions. In northwestern areas of China, it is often called liangpi zi (凉皮子). Although liangpi is served cold, they are served in every season, including winter.\n\nNew York Times' Julia Moskin describes liangpi as served at Xi'an Famous Foods as \"a dish of cold noodles in a sauce that hits every possible flavor category (sweet, tangy, savory, herbal, nutty and dozens of others).\"\n\nLiangpi literally means \"cold skin\", although it contains no animal products. There are several ways of making liangpi: \n\nFirst, wheat or rice flour is turned into a soft dough by adding water and a little bit of salt. Then, the dough is put in a bowl, water is added and the dough has to be \"rinsed\" until the water is saturated with starch from the dough, turning into a muddy white color. The remainder of the dough is now removed, and the bowl is left to rest overnight at a cool place to allow the dissolved starch to precipitate.\n\nThe following day, there will be a kind of starch-paste on the bottom of the bowl, with a more or less clear liquid on top, which has to be discarded. Once the liquid has been removed, a small amount of the paste can then be poured into a flat plate or tray, and spread evenly in a thin layer. The whole plate is placed into a large pot full of boiling water, where it is steamed for a couple of minutes, and the resulting \"pancake\" cut into long pieces vaguely resembling noodles.\n\n\"Hanzhong Liangpi\" () or \"Hanzhong Mianpi\" (), named for the city of Hanzhong in southwestern Shaanxi, are steamed liangpi with garlic and hot chili oil. Unlike other places, it is often served hot rather than cold.\n\nMajiang Liangpi () are liangpi garnished with julienned cucumber and a sauce made of salt, vinegar, hot chili oil and especially Chinese sesame paste, for which it is named ().\n\nShaanxi Gan Mianpi (陕西岐山擀面皮） is another type of Liangpi, which tastes a bit firmer and looks darker in color compared to other Liangpi. The process of making Gan Mianpi is quite laborious, including several iterations to separate gluten and starch, by washing the dough in cold water a few times. After washing, mainly gluten is left in the dough, which can be solidified by boiling (called Mianjin). The starch water is thickened by boiling as well, then spread on a pan and further cooked as a pancake.\n\nIt is always served with Mianjin (solidified gluten), cooked vinegar, hot chili oil, salt, mashed garlic in water and bean sprout.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "20380570", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20380570", "title": "Pig candy", "text": "Pig candy\n\nPig candy is a dessert made by taking thick strips of smoked bacon and pecans and coating them in caramel or another type of sugar, notably brown sugar. Cayenne pepper can be added and it can be dipped in chocolate. This dish is then served warm or cold and is popular in the southern United States, and it has also become very popular in Washington D.C.. It is similar to glazed bacon, featured on Martha Stewart Living.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "20382397", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20382397", "title": "Chicken mull", "text": "Chicken mull\n\nChicken mull is a traditional dish from North Carolina, upstate South Carolina and Georgia. It is a type of stew consisting of parboiled whole chicken in a cream or milk based broth, butter and seasoned with salt, pepper and other ingredients. Traditionally, the stew is served in the late fall and winter months. In northern Georgia, this part of the year is often referred to as \"mull season\". Often the term \"chicken stew\" or \"chicken mull\" refers to an event or gathering where the dish is served.\n\nRecipes for chicken mull vary slightly from person to person, but it is usually made by first cooking a whole chicken by boiling or parboiling, allowing a rich broth to form. The chicken is then removed from the pot and the meat is pulled from the bones or cut off with a knife. The skin, bones and fat are removed as well. Sometimes boneless, skinless chicken breasts are used instead of a whole chicken. A thickening of milk or cream is made (and sometimes evaporated milk is added as well) and added to the broth. Several sleeves of saltine crackers can be crumbled into broth and chicken mixture as it is the more common method of thickening the mull. The chicken is usually ground up in a meat grinder, although sometimes it is cut into small pieces. The chicken is then added back into the liquid along with salt, pepper and butter or margarine. Various other ingredients may be added to the stew according to local tradition, (such as diced potatoes or onions); a more common addition is varying amounts of hot sauce.\n\nThe stew varies in color from white to pale yellow, depending on the amount of butter or margarine used. It can vary in thickness from very thin and soup-like to thick and creamy. Saltine crackers are commonly served with chicken mull, either on the side or crumbled into the bowl.\nOther, nearly identical variations of a \"mull\" can be made using either catfish, oysters or canned salmon, instead of chicken.\n\nBecause of its low cost of preparation and reputation as a local comfort food, chicken mull is often served at large social gatherings such as church fellowships, family reunions and community fundraisers. It is a tradition at these gatherings to prepare the mull in a large cast iron or stainless steel pot, often outdoors over an open fire. Bowls of mull are sometimes complemented with coleslaw, rice or grilled cheese sandwiches. In North Carolina and Georgia, \"chicken mulls\" or \"chicken stews\" are social events usually held during the colder seasons, with most events occurring September through December.\n\n"}
{"id": "20426802", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20426802", "title": "Gatsby (sandwich)", "text": "Gatsby (sandwich)\n\nA Gatsby is a South African submarine sandwich typically sold as a foot-long sandwich sliced into four portions. It is a popular sandwich in the Western Cape province, with many fast food and takeaway restaurants, stores and food stands purveying them. One large sandwich may be shared among several people. The Gatsby is also sometimes mistakenly referred to by the nickname AK47, which is a variant of the sandwich made in Johannesburg, in part due to how it can be held in one's arm in a similar manner to the firearm. It has been described as a \"filling, budget meal\", a standard menu item in Cape Town corner stores, and as a significant part of the heritage and a cultural symbol of Cape Flats, where it originated.\n\nGatsby usually consist of long bread rolls cut lengthwise and opened up to form a sort of cradle which is filled with various fillings. While the choice of filling in a Gatsby varies widely depending on customer preference and vendor, one standard item is usually hot chips, i.e., French fries or slap chips (French fries with vinegar). Hot dog buns and roti flat bread are sometimes used, and it is typically prepared using a sauce, most commonly achar or piri piri. They are typically a large-sized sandwich, and have been described as suitable for sharing among several people.\n\nDifferent varieties of Gatsbys use meat ingredients such as chargrilled steak, masala steak, fresh or pickled fish, calamari, chicken, polony, curry, Vienna sausage, Russian sausage and eggs.\n\nThe Gatsby sandwich originated in the Cape Flats area of Cape Town, where Athlone shop owner Rashaad Pandy was renovating a new location. He wanted a serve a quick but filling meal to his hired help, so he put South-African-style French Fries known colloquially as \"slap chips,\" polony and achaar in a large round of bread and cut this into wedges. One of the workers, a gentleman who went by the moniker Froggy, upon tasting a piece of this sandwich, called it a \"Gatsby smash,\" after the 1974 movie, The Great Gatsby, which had been shown recently at an Athlone cinema. The name stuck and Pandy subsequently offered the sandwich in the shop. It immediately became popular with locals. As the popularity grew, he contracted with a local bakery to provide a longer, French-style roll for the sandwich. This is ultimately the form which became hugely popular and eventually became one of South Africa's most well-known fast-foods. \n\nThough nowadays the Gatsby takes on all shapes, combinations and sizes ensuring that you stay filled for less with the most popular being a fresh foot long sandwich with French fries (also known as slap chips in Cape Town) with the choice of polony, Vienna, Russian, chicken, fish or steak. As the Gatsby is large, filling and cheap meal this practice has carried on in modern times with the Gatsby purveyed in full, half and quarter sizes. This practice of combining various combinations of food in a singular meal became popular all around Cape Town and continues to grow in popularity even amongst the wealthier patrons.\n\nIn October 2013, an event in Cape Town occurred at a waterfront where chefs prepared a Gatsby sandwich that was over long. A focus of the event was, per its organizers, to create South Africa’s \"first official heart-healthy Gatsby.\" The sandwich was modified to increase fiber content and to lower sodium, saturated fat and total fat, making the sandwich more heart-healthy. Pharma Dynamics sponsored the event.\n\n"}
{"id": "20429358", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20429358", "title": "Ptitim", "text": "Ptitim\n\nPtitim (, literally 'flakes') is a type of toasted pasta shaped like rice grains, little balls, or multiple other shapes developed in Israel in the 1950s when rice was scarce. Outside Israel, it is typically marketed as Israeli couscous, Jerusalem couscous, or pearl couscous. In Israel, it originally became known as \"Ben-Gurion rice\" (Hebrew: אורז בן-גוריון, \"órez Ben-Gurion\"), though it is mainly called \"ptitim\" nowadays.\n\nPtitim was created in 1953, during the austerity period in Israel. Israel's first prime minister, David Ben-Gurion, asked Eugen Proper, one of the founders of the Osem food company, to quickly devise a wheat-based substitute to rice. Consequently, it was nicknamed \"Ben-Gurion rice\" by the people. The company took up the challenge and developed ptitim, which is made of hard wheat flour and toasted in an oven. The product was instantly a success, after which ptitim made in the shape of small, dense balls (which the company termed \"couscous\") was added to the original rice-shaped ptitim.\n\nPtitim is made by extruding dough through a round mold, before it is cut and toasted, giving it the uniform natural-grain-like shape and its unique nutty flavor. Unlike common types of pasta and couscous, ptitim was factory-made from the outset, and therefore is rarely seen home-made from scratch. The store-bought product is easy and quick to prepare.\n\nPtitim is popular among Israeli children, who eat it plain, or mixed with fried onion and tomato paste. Ptitim is now produced in ring, star, and heart shapes for added appeal. For the health conscious consumers, whole wheat and spelt flour varieties are also available.\n\nWhile considered a children's food in Israel, ptitim is sometimes used in dishes even at the \"trendiest restaurants\" in other countries. In the United States, it can be found on the menus of contemporary American chefs, and can be bought in gourmet markets.\n\nPtitim can be used in many different types of dishes, both hot and cold. The grains retain their shape and texture even when reheated, and they do not clump together. Commonly, ptitim is prepared with sautéed onions or garlic (vegetables, meat, chicken or sausage can also be added). The ptitim grains may be fried for a short time before adding water. They can also be baked, go in soup, served in a pie, used for stuffing, or made as a risotto. Ptitim may also be used in other dishes as a substitute for pasta or rice. American chef Charlie Trotter has produced a number of recipes for ptitim-based gourmet dishes, even as a dessert.\n\nPearl-shaped ptitim is very similar to the Ashkenazi Jewish farfel, which was brought to Israel by Ashkenazi Jews from Europe beginning in the 1800’s. Farfel was likely ptitim’s predecessor, as the two are very similar and are often substituted for each other.\n\nPtitim is also coincidentally similar in shape to the Levantine and North African pearled couscous which pre-date it, known as maftoul or moghrabieh in Jordan, Lebanon, Palestinian territories and Syria. While the Levantine dish is a coated couscous, ptitim is an extruded paste, and the two are very different in terms of taste and preparation.\n\nPtitim is also similar to the Kabyle berkoukes (aka \"abazine\") and the Sardinian fregula, but these, too - unlike ptitim - are rolled and coated products.\n\nThe ptitim variety may also resemble some products of the pastina family, in particular acini di pepe, orzo (\"risoni\") and \"stellini\". However, unlike pastina, the ptitim grains are pre-baked/toasted to give them their chewy texture and nutty flavor.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "20439501", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20439501", "title": "Banana split", "text": "Banana split\n\nA banana split is an ice cream-based dessert. In its traditional form it is served in a long dish called a boat. A banana is cut in half lengthwise (hence the name) and laid in the dish. There are many variations, but the classic banana split is made with three scoops of ice cream (one each of vanilla, chocolate, and strawberry) served between the split banana. A sauce or sauces (chocolate, strawberry, and caramel are traditional) are drizzled onto the ice cream, then crushed nuts (generally peanuts or walnuts is optional.) and whipped cream (optional) , then topped with a maraschino cherry.\n\nDavid Evans Strickler, a 23-year-old apprentice pharmacist at Tassel Pharmacy, located at 805 Ligonier Street in Latrobe, Pennsylvania, who enjoyed inventing sundaes at the store's soda fountain, invented the banana-based triple ice cream sundae in 1904. The sundae originally cost 10 cents, twice the price of other sundaes, and caught on with students of nearby Saint Vincent College. News of a new variety of sundae quickly spread by word-of-mouth and through correspondence and soon progressed far beyond Latrobe. A popular recipe published in 1907 called for a lengthwise split banana, two scoops of ice cream at each end and a spoon of whipped cream in between with maraschino cherry on top, with one end covered with chopped mixed nuts and another with chopped mixed fruits.\n\nStrickler went on to buy the pharmacy, naming it Strickler's Pharmacy, while keeping his office on a top floor.\n\nThe city of Latrobe celebrated the 100th anniversary of the invention of the banana split in 2004 and, in the same year, the National Ice Cream Retailers Association (NICRA) certified the city as its birthplace. It is the place of an annual Great American Banana Split Celebration and a keeper of the original soda fountain where the first now famous throughout the world confection was made. \n\nThe Great American Banana Split Celebration is held throughout the downtown Latrobe area in late August with food, fun and events for kids and adults to enjoy. In November 2014 the Latrobe Community Revitalization Program, after managing the event for 2 years, handed over the organization of the event to the Greater Latrobe-Laurel Valley Community Chamber of Commerce.\nWilmington, Ohio also claims an early connection. In 1907, restaurant owner Ernest Hazard wanted to attract students from Wilmington College during the slow days of winter. He staged an employee contest to come up with a new ice cream dish. When none of his workers were up to the task, he split a banana lengthwise, threw it into an elongated dish and created his own dessert. The town commemorates the event each June with its own Banana Split Festival.\n\nWalgreens is credited with spreading the popularity of the banana split. The early drug stores operated by Charles Rudolph Walgreen in the Chicago area adopted the banana split as a signature dessert. Fountains in the stores proved to be a draw, attracting customers who might otherwise have been just as satisfied having their prescriptions filled at some other drug store in the neighborhood.\n\nThe banana split pie was created by Janet Winquest, a 16-year-old resident of Holdrege, Nebraska. In 1952, she won a $3,000 prize in Pillsbury's Grand National Recipe and Baking Contest for the recipe.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "20482322", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20482322", "title": "Prinskorv", "text": "Prinskorv\n\nPrinskorv, which directly translates to \"prince sausage\", is a small Swedish sausage which is often sold in links. Created in 1805 by Viennese butcher Georg Lahner, this dish is usually fried in a frying pan and served with a generous helping of mustard. The demand for this Swedish delicacy increases and reaches its peak during the Christmas season. At that time, stores usually have reserves to meet their customers' needs.\n\nTraditionally made from spiced pork and veal stuffed in sheep casings, these mini-sausages are known for their crown-like cuts. They are a short variety of Vienna sausage. The Prinskorv is a popular component of the \"julbord\" and the Swedish Christmas smörgåsbord, along with ham, liver pate, potatoes, rice pudding, pickled beets, herring salad, various cheeses, bread, and different sweets.\n\nAccording to the Swedish food chain Hemköp, the Prinskorv is also a midsummer favorite of Sweden's southern region. Enjoyed during afternoons and featured during their midsummer party after the summer solstice, this is usually served with Janssons frestelse, meatballs, pickled herring, crackers and salads.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "20482556", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20482556", "title": "Fläskkorv", "text": "Fläskkorv\n\nFläskkorv () is a Swedish sausage made largely or entirely from pork. Traditionally it is sold raw (though now it is not uncommon to find precooked varieties), and often served during the Christmas smörgåsbord (Julbord).\n\nA typical accompaniment is rotmos, a dish made from mashed carrots, potatoes and rutabagas (swedes).\n\n\n"}
{"id": "20497486", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20497486", "title": "Wurstsalat", "text": "Wurstsalat\n\nWurstsalat (German, literally \"sausage salad\") is a tart sausage salad prepared with distilled white vinegar, oil and onions. A variation of the recipe adds stripes of pickled gherkin. It is normally made from a sort of boiled sausage like Lyoner, stadtwurst, Regensburger Wurst (two types of cooked sausage) or extrawurst. It is a traditional snack in southern Germany, Alsace, Switzerland and Austria, where in Austria it is called Saure Wurst.\n\nTo prepare the dish, the sausage is cut into thin slices or strips and placed, along with raw onion rings or cubes, in a vinegar and oil marinade, lightly seasoned with salt, pepper, and sometimes paprika. Common additional ingredients are finely cut gherkins, radishes, parsley or chives. Wurstsalat is normally served with bread and sometimes also with fried potatoes.\n\nPopular variants are the \"Schwäbischer Wurstsalat\" (Swabian wurstsalat), which is half composed of blood sausage, and especially the \"Schweizer Wurstsalat\" (Swiss wurstsalat), which like the \"Straßburger Wurstsalat\" (Strasburg wurstsalat) or \"Elsässer Wurstsalat\" (Alsacian wurstsalat) also contains Emmental cheese and uses the traditional Swiss Servelat instead of Lyoner sausage.\n\n"}
{"id": "20500234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20500234", "title": "Quebec cider", "text": "Quebec cider\n\nQuebec cider is crafted in the apple-producing regions of Montérégie, Eastern Townships, Chaudière-Appalaches, the Laurentides, Charlevoix and Capitale-Nationale, in Canada. The revival of cider is a relatively new phenomenon, since Quebec's alcohol regulating body, the \"Régie des alcools, des courses et des jeux\" began issuing permits to produce craft cider only in 1988. In 2008, some 40 cider makers were producing more than 100 apple-based alcoholic beverages.\n\nThe honour of planting the first apple tree in the history of Quebec goes to Louis Hébert, apothecary from Paris and New France's first settler. He did so around 1617 on the site where Quebec City was founded in 1608. A good number of the first French settlers to the colony were Normans who brought over the apple cider craft. Sizable orchards developed in the region of New France, particularly on Île d'Orléans.\n\nThe Sulpicians, who settled on the Island of Montreal in 1657, possessed, beginning in 1666, a little orchard inside the fenced garden of the seminary on Notre-Dame Street. A bigger orchard was planted on the side of Mount Royal, in the mid-1670s. On this site, the \"mission de la Montagne\" where Marguerite Bourgeoys had her school, they erected a fort, in 1685, where they were using two cider presses. In 1705, the production of cider was about 30 barrels, and part was sold outside the religious community.\n\nIn 1731, the orchards covered on the Island of Montreal, on the side of the mountain and around town. From 1731 to 1781, the surface area occupied by the orchards rose from . The common cultivars at the time were the Calville blanc, Calville rouge, Famous, Reinette, Bourassa, Pomme blanche, Pomme grise of Montreal and Sauvageon. These cultivars have been supplanted by others since.\n\nThe British Conquest of 1760, confirmed by the cession of 1763, brought along all kinds of changes in the habits of French Canadians. Great Britain's protectionist trade policy, limiting exchanges within the British Empire, favoured the importation of alcohols from England (whisky, gin) and Antilles (rum), and discouraged all the artisanal productions of the inhabitants. Only beer, produced by industrialists from Great Britain (or of British origin), expanded significantly in the 19th century.\n\nOn August 15, 1807, in \"Le Canadien\" of Quebec City, there was an article in which the author deplored that more efforts were not made to encourage the cultivation of apples on Île d'Orléans and to export cider, which he judged \"superior or at least equal to that of Europe and the United States\". He suggested also that the production could serve to diminish the excessive consumption of rum, a \"source of disastrous ruins in a lot of families.\"\n\nThe artisanal production of cider continued until the period of prohibition on alcohol in the middle of the 1910s. In April 1919, a great majority of Quebecers (78.62%) voted yes in a Quebec referendum asking them if \"beer, ciders, and light wines\" should be allowed, as excluded from the list of prohibited alcoholic beverages. However, in 1920, a legislative omission rendered cider illegal in the territory of Quebec. Indeed, the Canadian \"Alcoholic Beverages Act\" which ended prohibition and created the monopoly of the \"Commission des liqueurs du Québec\", did not legislate on cider, which consequently found itself in a judicial void. It was only in 1970, half a century later, that the situation was corrected. During this period, cider continued to be produced by several apple growers, but they were not legally permitted to sell it.\n\nWhen cider became legal again, Quebecers were served a cider produced industrially, which was disliked very much by many and gave it a bad reputation. Makers were unable to supply to the demand and inundated the market with products that had no maturity. A whole generation experienced the Grand Sec d'Orléans, which to many, evoked what is most undrinkable when it comes to alcohol. Sales declined after a few years, and cider, barely gotten out of its \"dark age\", was plunged back into it. From about a year in 1971, the production dropped to per year in 1982. It was only at the end of the 1980s when the first craft production permits were issued by the \"Régie des alcools, des courses et des jeux du Québec\", that Quebec cider was truly reborn, about the same time as beer and wine, for the same reason.\n\nThe ciders crafted by small cider makers then multiplied, often avoiding to use the word \"cidre\" on the bottle to avoid alarming the consumers. The first Quebec ice cider was crafted by Christian Barthomeuf in Dunham in the Eastern Townships during the winter of 1989–1990. The first bottles bear the \"1990\" \"millésime\". Ten years later, cider makers obtained the authorization to name their products \"cidre de glace\" (ice cider). A regulation on cider was finally adopted by the National Assembly of Quebec in November 2008.\n\nQuebec cider makers prepare various types of ciders, which are categorized according to the production method, the percentage of alcohol, the effervescence, or the residual sugar content.\n\nCider is said to be \"light\" when it contains 7% of alcohol or less, \"strong\" when it contains 7% to 13%, and \"apéritif\" when between 13% to 20%. \"Flavoured\" cider, perfumed with aromas of berries, honey or maple, generally contains less than 10% alcohol.\n\nAs it is with wine, cider can be \"still\" (without bubble) or \"sparkling\" (with bubbles).\n\nSparkling apple cider is crafted either by injecting carbon dioxide, in \"closed vats\" using the Charmat process or the traditional \"champenoise\" method. The result is a cider said to be \"semi-sparkling\" when in impregnated naturally with carbon dioxide, under low pressure (less than ), \"carbonated semi-sparkling\" when impregnated artificially with carbon dioxide, also under low pressure. It is \"sparkling\" when impregnated naturally with carbon dioxide under a pressure between and \"carbonated sparkling\", if artificially impregnated with carbon dioxide under of the same pressure of .\n\nApple mistelle is a cider obtained from a must kept fresh, that is unfermented, to which alcohol is added.\n\nIce cider, an innovation from Quebec, is crafted by pressing apples naturally frozen by winter's cold. Similar to the late harvest of grapes, apples picked during winter allow for a must with a high sugar content, when water, turned into ice, is separated from the apples. This step is called the \"cryoconcentration\" of sugar. The final result, after the fermentation of the must, is a liqueur-like and mellow liquid, containing between 9 and 13% of alcohol.\n\nQuebec counts six cider-producing regions, which correspond more or less with its apple-producing regions: the Montérégie, Eastern Townships, Chaudière-Appalaches, the Laurentides, Charlevoix, and Capitale-Nationale.\n\nCultivation of apples is well developed in Quebec, which produces in quantity several cultivars of apples, the McIntosh, Paula Red, Spartan, Cortland, Empire, Vista Bella and Jersey Mac being among the most common.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "20514435", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20514435", "title": "Danny Boy et ses Pénitents", "text": "Danny Boy et ses Pénitents\n\nDanny Boy et ses Pénitents is a French rock'n'roll, twist and beat band of the 1960s whose singer was Danny Boy, real name Claude Piron, born on 25 January 1936 in Saint-Pierre-de-Cormeilles (Eure). The four musicians (Penitents) who accompanied Danny Boy were wearing a balaclava.\n\nClaude Piron can be considered one of the first French rock singers. He began his solo career in 1958 with a successful Kalin Twins cover \"When\", renamed \"Viens\". He recorded his first record under his real name, before taking in 1960 the pseudonym of Danny Boy and then formed Danny Boy et ses Pénitents, composed of Bruno (guitar), Ralai (guitar), Didier (bass guitar) and Jose (drums).\n\nTheir first hits: \"Un collier de tes bras\", \"Un coup au cœur\", \"C'est encore une souris\", \"Je ne veux plus être un dragueur\", revealed Piron's tone of voice particularly well hit and plain, which distinguishes it from other singers. Other notable hits: \"C'est tout comme\", \"Danny Boy\", \"Croque la pomme…\".\n\nIn 1962, Danny Boy et ses Pénitents toured for eight months with circus Pinder. In 1967, they also toured with Vince Taylor.\n\nDanny Boy is also an actor. He played in a French-Italian film in 1964: \"La Difficulté d'être infidèle\" (\"The difficulty of being unfaithful\"), directed by Bernard Toublanc-Michel and nominated to the 14th Berlin International Film Festival for the \"Golden Bear\".\n\nDanny Boy made his return on stage in 2004 together with the \"Vinyls\".\n\n1958\n\n\n1959\n\n\n1961\n\n\n1962\n\n\n1963\n\n\n1964\n\n"}
{"id": "20523099", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20523099", "title": "Doolittles", "text": "Doolittles\n\nDoolittles was an Irish sandwich making company. The company manufactured prepacked sandwiches for retail outlets to sell. It was headquartered in Laghey, County Donegal.\n\nIn 2001 Jenni Timony opened \"Doolittles\" in the \"New Row\" area of Donegal. The company began to manufacture sandwiches for retail outlets and expanded throughout Ireland. In 2006 the company won the Ulster Bank Invoice Finance/ Irish Independent Business Achievers Award.\n\nAer Arann served Doolittles sandwiches as part of its buy on board programme.\n\nThe company was liquidated in 2009, with many unpaid creditors. \n\n"}
{"id": "20532723", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20532723", "title": "Bacon and cabbage", "text": "Bacon and cabbage\n\nBacon and cabbage () is a dish traditionally associated with Ireland. The dish consists of sliced back bacon boiled with cabbage and potatoes. Smoked bacon is sometimes used.\n\nThe dish is served with the bacon sliced, and with some of the boiling juices added. Another common accompaniment to the dish is white sauce, which consists of flour, butter and milk, sometimes with a flavouring of some sort (often parsley).\n\nThe bacon used for the meal can vary somewhat depending on individual preference. Usually back bacon is used for the recipe, but other cuts of bacon are sometimes preferred. However, the bacon used is almost always cured. The traditional curing process is a long process which involves storing the bacon in salt, however, in modern times, mass-produced bacon is cured using brine which is less frequently injected into the meat to speed-up the process. The bacon can also be smoked which adds a depth of flavour which some people prefer. In Ireland, one can also purchase what is known as \"home-cured\" or \"hard-cured\" which is bacon cured over a long period and then stored for another long spell, wrapped in paper. This makes the bacon very salty, hard in texture and yellowish in colour.\n\nHistorically, this dish was common fare in Irish homes as the ingredients were readily available as many families grew their own vegetables and reared their own pigs. It was considered nourishing and satisfying. The dish continues to be a very common meal in Ireland.\n\nIn the mid-to-late 19th century, Irish immigrants to the United States began substituting corned beef for bacon when making the dish, thereby creating corned beef and cabbage. Like the original, the dish sometimes includes additional vegetables (especially carrots and potatoes); this also gives it a certain similarity to the New England boiled dinner, which almost invariably contains a mixture of root vegetables along with boiled meat and cabbage.\n\nCorned beef and cabbage remains a popular food in some areas of the United States, and is often the dish of choice on St. Patrick's Day.\n\nOn the island of Newfoundland, where the Irish and the English made up a large proportion of the founding settlers, this, and the similar English boiled beef gave rise to a boiled dinner featuring salted beef called Jiggs dinner.\n\n"}
{"id": "20537095", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20537095", "title": "Bob Andy pie", "text": "Bob Andy pie\n\nBob Andy pie is a sweet pie. It is similar to a custard pie that is spiced with cinnamon and cloves. It is often said to have originated among the Amish and is named for two legendary gelding workhorses.\n\n"}
{"id": "20541409", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20541409", "title": "Tsumi", "text": "Tsumi\n\nThe term evolved to its present form as a contraction of , a verb which very generally indicated the occurrence of a negative event. In ancient Japan the word thus indicated not only crimes and other forbidden human actions, but also diseases, disasters, pollution, ugliness and any other unpleasant object or fact. \nThe Engishiki, a 927 AD Japanese book of laws and regulations, for example, distinguishes two kinds of \"tsumi\", the and the . The first category deals with infractions against property, the second mainly with infractions against people. Some of the \"tsumi\" have to do with disease and natural disasters, and are not therefore \"sins\" in the modern sense, but order perturbations (\"kegare\") which had to be dealt with and solved by the person or persons concerned in certain ways, for example through purification rites called \"harae\".\n\n"}
{"id": "20543649", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20543649", "title": "Pasteurized eggs", "text": "Pasteurized eggs\n\nPasteurized eggs are eggs that have been pasteurized in order to reduce the risk of food-borne illness in dishes that are not cooked or are only lightly cooked. They may be sold as liquid egg products or pasteurized in the shell.\n\nThe 2013 United States Food and Drug Administration Food Code defines regular shell eggs as a potentially hazardous food, i.e., “a food that requires time/temperature control for safety (TCS) to limit pathogenic microorganism growth or toxin formation.” \n\nAll egg products sold in the U.S that are pasteurized due to the risk of food-borne illnesses are done per U.S. Department of Agriculture rules. They also do not allow any egg products to be sold without going through the process of pasteurization. They also do not recommend eating shell eggs that are raw or undercooked due to the possibility that Salmonella bacteria may be present.\n\nBecause of the risk of food-borne illness caused by \"Salmonella\" bacteria that may be present in raw eggs, the U.S. Department of Agriculture requires a safe-handling advisory statement on all packages of raw shell eggs that are not treated to destroy \"Salmonella\" as follows: \"Safe Handling Instructions: To prevent illness from bacteria: Keep eggs refrigerated, cook eggs until yolks are firm, and cook foods containing eggs thoroughly.\" \n\nThe primary risk associated with eggs is food-borne illness caused by \"Salmonella enteritidis\" bacteria. \"Salmonella enteritidis\" is a dangerous bacterium that can be transferred to humans through ingestion of raw or undercooked eggs. Nearly four out of five \"Salmonella\"-related foodborne illness cases share a common vehicle: raw or undercooked shell eggs.\n\nSalmonellosis, the illness that a \"Salmonella\" infection causes, is characterized by nausea, vomiting, abdominal cramps, diarrhea, fever, and headache. The onset of its symptoms begins between six hours and 72 hours after the consumption of food contaminated with \"Salmonella\" bacteria. As few as 15 bacterial cells can cause food-borne illness.\n\nWhile the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimate there are one million cases of salmonellosis per year in the US leading to 19,000 hospitalizations and 380 deaths , the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) estimates that only 79,000 cases each year are the result of consuming eggs contaminated with \"Salmonella\", of which only 30 result in death.\n\nIn Europe, all hens are required to be vaccinated against salmonellosis. Eggs are not washed or refrigerated since condensation could lead to salmonellosis contamination. In the US, it is important to keep eggs refrigerated since not all hens are vaccinated.\n\nThe process of pasteurizing eggs also destroys avian flu virus.\n\nThe 2013 FDA Food Code states that in serving highly susceptible populations (preschool age children; older adults; individuals with compromised immune systems; and individuals who receive meals through custodial care-giving environments such as child or adult day care centers, kidney dialysis centers, hospitals, or nursing homes ): “Pasteurized eggs or egg products shall be substituted for raw eggs in the preparation of Foods such as Caesar salad, hollandaise or Béarnaise sauce, mayonnaise, meringue, eggnog, ice cream, egg-fortified beverages and recipes in which more than one egg is broken and the eggs are combined.”\n\nThe FDA Food Code has gained adoption by health jurisdictions throughout the U.S.\n\nAs distinct from whole shell eggs, “egg products” are defined by the U.S. Department of Agriculture as “eggs that are removed from their shells for processing.\" The processing of egg products includes breaking eggs, filtering, mixing, stabilizing, blending, pasteurizing, cooling, freezing or drying, and packaging. This is done at U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA)-inspected plants.\n\nEgg products include whole eggs, whites, yolks and various blends with or without non-egg ingredients that are processed and pasteurized and may be available in liquid, frozen, and dried forms. This is achieved by heating the products to a specified temperature for a specified period.\n\nAccording to the U.S. Department of Agriculture, in-shell pasteurized eggs may be used safely without cooking. For example, they may safely be consumed raw (as in raw cookie dough or eggnog) or in undercooked forms (such as a sunny-side up egg). Many food service and health care providers use these eggs to prevent cross-contamination in their kitchens.\n\nBy traditional pasteurization methods, heating a raw shell egg to a high enough temperature to achieve pasteurization would also cook the egg. However, beginning in the early 1980s, Dr. James P. Cox and R.W. Duffy Cox of Lynden, Washington, began developing methods to pasteurize shell eggs.\n\nIn the early 1990s, the Coxes were introduced to L. John Davidson. Davidson recognized the market need and opportunity for a safer egg option for consumers and food operations around the country. Davidson acquired a license agreement on the technology from the Cox Family and formed Pasteurized Egg Corporation to introduce safe egg technology to the consumer marketplace.\n\nThe process for pasteurizing shell eggs has been patented. Currently, National Pasteurized Eggs Inc. of Lansing, Illinois, owns Dr. Cox's patent to the pasteurization process. Only National Pasteurized Eggs Inc. can provide pasteurized shell eggs produced through these patented processes. The eggs can be found in all U.S. states under the brand Davidson's Safest Choice®, introduced in 2003.\n\nPasteurizing eggs in their shells is achieved through a technique that uses precise time and temperature zones within water baths. Pasteurizing eggs in their shells can also be achieved through a process that involves treatment with ozone and reactive oxygen species under high and low pressures, followed by replacement with an inert gas, such as nitrogen. Currently, shell eggs pasteurized using the heating technique are the only commercially available pasteurized eggs. According to the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Shell eggs can be pasteurized by a processor if FDA accepted the process for the destruction of Salmonella. Pasteurized shell eggs are now available at some grocery stores and must be kept refrigerated to retain quality. The equipment to pasteurize shell eggs isn't available for home use, and it is very difficult to pasteurize shell eggs at home without cooking the contents of the egg.\n\nAfter pasteurization, the eggs are coated with food-grade wax to maintain freshness and prevent environmental contamination and stamped with a blue or red \"P\" in a circle to distinguish them from unpasteurized eggs.\n\nOpinion on the quality of pasteurized shell eggs is mixed, and sometimes depends on whether comparisons involve experimental processes or products that are actually on the market. Taste tests noted deficiencies in pasteurized shell eggs experimentally produced via a microwaved pasteurization process (not for commercially available pasteurized shell eggs). Using commercially available pasteurized shell eggs, a \"San Francisco Chronicle\" reporter noted a \"slight chemical taste\" for pasteurized shell eggs, and a Lifescript blogger noted a \"barely detectable\" flavor and aroma difference and stated the eggs were \"worth\" their price. \"Relish\" magazine states that pasteurized shell eggs “look like real eggs, act like real eggs and taste like real eggs.” \n“Independent taste tests conducted in Good Housekeeping kitchens have not been able to tell any differences between raw and pasteurized eggs,” according to \"Food Safety News\", and in two out of three tastings a \"Chicago Tribune\" reporter preferred pasteurized eggs flavor over farmers market eggs. \nAccording to \"International Business Times\", demand for pasteurized shell eggs within the food service industry is strong because, as of 2008, “states such as California, Iowa, Michigan, Wisconsin and Illinois have adopted the most recent FDA Food Code, in which pasteurized shell eggs shall be substituted for raw eggs to at-risk groups.” \n\nThe FDA Food Code exempts pasteurized shell eggs from the definition of \"time/temperature control for safe food.” requirement to carry a safe handling advisory statement.\n\nThe U.S. Department of Agriculture also states, “In-shell pasteurized eggs may be used safely without cooking.”\n\n"}
{"id": "20558359", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20558359", "title": "Dr. Wells", "text": "Dr. Wells\n\nDr. Wells is a \"pepper-style\" carbonated soft drink manufactured by The Dad's Root Beer Company, LLC. of Jasper, Indiana, and owned by Hedinger Brands, LLC. The brand is currently available in 12 ounce cans, 20 ounce plastic bottles and on fountain service in select markets in the United States. The \"pepper\" segment is the fourth largest flavor segment in the United States.\n\nDr. Wells was developed and introduced in 1935 as a \"pepper-style\" carbonated soft drink by Ludford Fruit Products of Los Angeles, California. Ludford Fruit Products was located on S. Western Avenue in L.A., and was also the National Headquarters for Alka-Time and Hollywood Beverages. Hollywood Beverages had the tag lines: \"The Stars Drink\" and \"It's Super Colossal!\". \n\nIn the 1970s, the Flavette division of the Rheingold Corporation purchased Dr. Wells and Mason & Mason, Inc., owners of Mason's Root Beer. \n\nThe Monarch Beverage Company of Atlanta purchased the brand in 1978 after PepsiCo had purchased the Rheingold Corporation and the Flavette division. The Federal Trade Commission felt that PepsiCo owned too many brands and forced it to divest several of its brands. \n\nIn 2007, Dr. Wells was purchased from Monarch, along with Dad's Root Beer, Bubble Up and Sun Crest, by Hedinger Brands, LLC and licensed to their own company, The Dad's Root Beer Company, LLC. The company headquarters is now located in Jasper, Indiana.\n\nPrior advertising slogans included: \"Makes a Nickel Thirsty\" and \"The Cooler Doctor\"\n\n\n"}
{"id": "20562039", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20562039", "title": "Parfait", "text": "Parfait\n\nParfait (; from French meaning \"perfect\") is two types of frozen dessert; in France, where the dish originated, parfait is made by boiling cream, egg, sugar and syrup to create a custard-like puree which is not necessarily served in a parfait glass. The American version includes more ingredients like granola, nuts, yogurt and liqueurs made in combination with a topping of fruits or whipped cream that are layered and served in a tall glass. The oldest known recipe dates back to 1892.\n\nIn France, parfait refers to a frozen dessert made from a base of sugar syrup, egg, and cream. A parfait contains enough fat, sugar, alcohol, and/or, to a lesser extent, air to allow it to be made by stirring infrequently while freezing, making it possible to create in a home kitchen without specialist equipment. The fat, sugar, alcohol or air interferes with the formation of water crystals, which would otherwise give the ice cream an uncomfortable texture in the mouth. The formation of ice crystals is managed in the making of regular ice cream by agitating the ice cream constantly while it freezes or chemically by adding glycerol. Neither should be necessary when making a high-quality parfait.\n\nIn the United Kingdom, parfait can refer to a very smooth meat paste (or pâté), usually made from liver (chicken or duck) and sweetened with liqueurs.\n\nIn the United States, \"parfait\" refers to either the traditional French-style dessert or to a popular variant, the American parfait, made by layering parfait cream, ice cream, and/or fruit, usually in a tall clear glass, but can be in a short and stubby glass. The clear glass displays the layers of the dessert. The topping is created with whipped cream, fresh or canned fruit, and/or liqueurs.\n\nRecent trends in the United States and Canada have introduced parfaits without cream or liqueurs. These are made by simply layering yogurt with granola, nuts, and/or fresh fruits (such as peaches, strawberries, or blueberries). This version is sometimes called a \"yogurt parfait\" or \"fruit parfait\" and is often served for breakfast.\n\n"}
{"id": "20567482", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20567482", "title": "Dundee cake", "text": "Dundee cake\n\nDundee cake is a traditional Scottish fruit cake with a rich flavour.\n\nThe cake is often made with currants, sultanas and almonds; sometimes, fruit peel may be added to it. The cake originated in nineteenth-century Scotland, and was originally made as a mass-produced cake by the marmalade company Keiller's marmalade. Keiller's first mass-produced the cake commercially and have been claimed to be the originators of the term \"Dundee cake\". However, similar fruit cakes were produced across Scotland. A popular story is that Mary Queen of Scots did not like glace cherries in her cakes, so the cake was first made for her, as a fruit cake that used blanched almonds and not cherries. The top of the cake is typically decorated with concentric circles of almonds. Today, the cakes are often sold in supermarkets throughout the United Kingdom.\n\nThe cake was also made and marketed in British India, and in independent India after 1947, by Britannia Industries and its successor firms. However, after 1980 the cake was withdrawn from the market though it continued to be supplied privately as a corporate Christmas gift by the maker.\n\nQueen Elizabeth is reported to favour Dundee cake at tea-time.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "20578552", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20578552", "title": "Payne (name)", "text": "Payne (name)\n\nThe surname Payne originates in France as a variation of the name Payen (Payen; Payens) The name was brought to the British Isles by French nobility as a result of the Norman Conquest of England, and now is most common in English-speaking countries.\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "20580568", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20580568", "title": "Ndolé", "text": "Ndolé\n\nNdolé is a Cameroonian dish consisting of stewed nuts, ndoleh (bitter leaves indigenous to West Africa) and fish or beef.\n\nThe dish may also contain shrimp or prawns. It is traditionally eaten with plantain, bobolo (a Cameroonian dish made of fermented ground manioc or cassava and wrapped in leaves), etc.\n\n"}
{"id": "20580717", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20580717", "title": "Tirggel", "text": "Tirggel\n\nTirggel are traditional Christmas biscuits from Zürich, Switzerland. Made from flour and honey, they are thin, hard, and sweet.\n\n\"Tirggel\" are first recorded in Zürich as \"Dirgel\" in 1461. They have been manufactured there ever since with elaborately carved wooden moulds depicting Biblical or regional themes. More recently, the wooden moulds—four of which are exhibited in the Swiss National Museum—have been replaced by polycarbonate casts, which are easier to handle.\n\nTirggel dough is composed of flour, 29 percent honey, some sugar and water; although one source reports that it is or was made without sugar, which is taken to be an indication of the \"tirggel\"<nowiki>'</nowiki>s pre-Christian origins.\n\nThe dough is pressed very thinly into elaborately carved moulds of varying shapes and sizes. The biscuits are baked in a high-temperature oven at for only 90 seconds and require good timing to get right.\n\nBecause \"tirggel\" are hard and dry, they are best when sucked on for a while, which allows the honey flavour to become more pronounced.\n\n\"Tirggel\" are also very durable. Swiss writer Emanuel Stickelberger reported in 1939 that \"the \"tirggel\" has the admirable quality of not becoming stale, and the harder it gets, the more enjoyable is it to nibble on.\" On account of their elaborate ornamentation, traditionally manufactured \"tirggel\" are often not eaten at all for months or years and are kept as decorations instead.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "20588606", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20588606", "title": "Nahani", "text": "Nahani\n\nNahani (Nahane, Nahanni) is an Athapaskan word used to designate native groups located in British Columbia, the Northwest Territories and the Yukon Territory between the upper Liard River and the 64th parallel north latitude. While these native groups do not necessarily have anything in common, the Canadian government used the term \"Nahani\" until the 1970s to refer to them collectively. The group term applied to several distinct tribes:\n\nThese groups are identified as Southern Tutchone and Kaska language speakers. In 1996, there were 2,407 registered Nahani in Canada.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "20589273", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20589273", "title": "Gummy candy", "text": "Gummy candy\n\nGummies, gummy candies, or jelly candies are a broad category of gelatin-based chewable sweets. Gummi bears and Jelly Babies are widely popular and are a well-known part of the sweets industry. Gummies are available in a wide variety of shapes, most commonly colourful depictions of living things such as bears, babies, sharks, worms, frogs, fish, snakes, lizards, spiders, dinosaurs, dolphins, turtles and bats. Various brands such as Bassett's, Haribo, Betty Crocker, Disney and Kellogg's manufacture various forms of Gummi snacks, often targeted at young children. The name \"gummi\" originated in Germany, with the term \"jelly\" more common in English-speaking countries.\n\n\nThe Jelly Babies gum candy was the first commercialy available shaped gum candy. It originated in the United Kingdom. First produced by Fryers of Lancashire in 1864 and sold as \"Unclaimed Babies\". By 1918 they were (and still are) produced by Basset's in Sheffield as Jelly Babies.\n\nThe gummi bear originated in Germany, where it is popular under the name \"Gummibär\" (rubber bear) or \"Gummibärchen\" (little rubber bear). Hans Riegel Sr., a maker from Bonn, produced these sweets under the Haribo company, which he started in 1920.\n\nCola bottles are sweets in the shape of classic Coca-Cola-style bottles with a cola flavor. They are produced by numerous companies. \"Fizzy Blue Bottles\", made by Lutti (formerly part of the French division of the Leaf Company, now controlled by a private investment group), are sweets typically found in a pick and mix selection. These are very similar to cola bottle gummies in shape, but they are usually sour and coloured blue and pink. \"Blue Bottles\", a variation from another company, are identifiable by the small rims around the sides, and are chewier and thicker, with a sweeter taste.\n\nRing-shaped gummi is often covered in sugar or sour powder. The most common and popular flavor is the peach ring. Other flavors include green apple, melon, blue raspberry, strawberry, and aniseed - although these are typically coated in chocolate. A commonly known producer of gummi rings is Trolli, for which the gummi rings are an important asset.\n\nIn Australia, jelly confectionery in the shape of frogs has been very popular since the 1930s. They are colored red or green, although they are usually referred to as \"red frogs\". These have influenced the shape, structure, consistency and formula that makes gummy bears. Red frog gummies are not associated with the Red Frogs Association.\nIn February 2005, following complaints by the New Jersey Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, Kraft decided to stop production of the controversial Trolli U.S. Road Kill Gummies. The society complained that the products, shaped as partly flattened squirrels, chickens and snakes, would give children an incorrect message on the proper treatment of animals.\n\nIn Australia, jelly confectionery in the shape of teeth has been very popular since the 1930s. They are colored pink and white, with pink representing the gums and teeth being white. They have a slight minty flavor, similar to mint toothpaste. \n\nThere are many types of Gummy Worms, and Trolli produces glow worm gummies, with glowing color and sour sugar.\n\nThere are also many types of gummy sharks but the blue and white ones are the most popular.\n\nThere are also several multi-vitamin gummi bears, usually marketed for children, such as Flintstones Chewable Vitamins. These form of vitamins give off nutrients and protein for those that do not swallow pills or need various supplements to stay healthy.\n\nGummies landed on the \"What's out in 2009\" list for some Canadian schools, along with chocolate, fudge, chocolate coated nuts and fruit, bubble gum, lollipops, toffee, jelly beans, marshmallows, sherbet, and Turkish delight. An audit in Victoria, British Columbia, was planned for 2009 to ensure the government banned the selling of the confectionery treat in school stores and vending machines as directed.\n\nScientists have studied adding the tooth-protecting sugar substitute xylitol to gummies to fight tooth decay.\n\nChoking risks are higher with gummi candies; research shows that \"hard, round foods with high elasticity or lubricity properties, or both, pose a significant level of risk,\" especially to children under three years of age. This can be resolved with the Heimlich maneuver.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "20592794", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20592794", "title": "Ancient Roman sarcophagi", "text": "Ancient Roman sarcophagi\n\nIn the burial practices of ancient Rome and Roman funerary art, marble and limestone sarcophagi elaborately carved in relief were characteristic of elite inhumation burials from the 2nd to the 4th centuries AD. At least 10,000 Roman sarcophagi have survived, with fragments possibly representing as many as 20,000. Although mythological scenes have been mostly widely studied, sarcophagus relief has been called the \"richest single source of Roman iconography,\" and may also depict the deceased's occupation or life course, military scenes, and other subject matter. The same workshops produced sarcophagi with Jewish or Christian imagery. Early Christian sarcophagi produced from the late 3rd century onwards, represent the earliest form of large Christian sculpture, and are important for the study of Early Christian art.\n\nThey were mostly made in a few major cities, including Rome and Athens, which exported them to other cities. Elsewhere the stela gravestone remained more common. They were always a very expensive form reserved for the elite, and especially so in the relatively few very elaborately carved examples; most were always relatively plain, with inscriptions, or symbols such as garlands. Sarcophagi divide into a number of styles, by the producing area. \"Roman\" ones were made to rest against a wall, and one side was left uncarved, while \"Attic\" and other types were carved on all four sides; but the short sides were generally less elaborately decorated in both types.\n\nThe time taken to make them encouraged the use of standard subjects, to which inscriptions might be added to personalize them, and portraits of the deceased were slow to appear. The sarcophagi offer examples of intricate reliefs that depict scenes often based on Greek and Roman mythology or mystery religions that offered personal salvation, and allegorical representations. Roman funerary art also offers a variety of scenes from everyday life, such as game-playing, hunting, and military endeavors. Early Christian art quickly adopted the sarcophagus, and they are the most common form of early Christian sculpture, progressing from simple examples with symbols to elaborate fronts, often with small scenes of the Life of Christ in two rows within an architectural framework. The Sarcophagus of Junius Bassus (c. 359) is of this type, and the earlier Dogmatic Sarcophagus rather simpler. The huge porphyry Sarcophagi of Helena and Constantina are grand Imperial examples.\n\nCremation was the predominant means of disposing of remains in the Roman Republic. Ashes contained in cinerary urns and other monumental vessels were placed in tombs. From the 2nd century AD onward, inhumation became more common, and after the Roman Empire came under Christian rule, was standard practice. The Sarcophagus of Lucius Cornelius Scipio Barbatus is a rare example from much earlier. A sarcophagus, which means \"flesh-eater\" in Greek, is a stone coffin used for inhumation burials. Sarcophagi were commissioned not only for the elite of Roman society (mature male citizens), but also for children, entire families, and beloved wives and mothers. The most expensive sarcophagi were made from marble, but other stones, lead, and wood were used as well. Along with the range in production material, there existed a variety of styles and shapes, depending on where the sarcophagus was produced and whom it was produced for.\n\nInhumation burial practices and the use of sarcophagi were not always the favored Roman funerary custom. The Etruscans and Greeks used sarcophagi for centuries before the Romans finally adopted the practice in the second century. Prior to that period, the dead were usually cremated and placed in marble ash chests or ash altars, or were simply commemorated with a grave altar that was not designed to hold cremated remains. Despite being the main funerary custom during the Roman Republic, ash chests and grave altars virtually disappeared from the market only a century after the advent of the sarcophagus.\n\nIt is often assumed that the popularity for sarcophagi began with the Roman aristocracy and gradually became more accepted by the lower classes. However, in the past, the most expensive and ostentatious grave altars and ash chests were commissioned more frequently by wealthy freedmen and other members of the emerging middle class than by the Roman elite. Due to this fact and the lack of inscriptions on early sarcophagi, there is not enough evidence to make a judgment on whether or not the fashion for sarcophagi began with a specific social class. Surviving evidence does indicate that a great majority of early sarcophagi were used for children. This suggests that the change in burial practice may not have simply stemmed from a change in fashion, but perhaps from altered burial attitudes. It is possible that the decision to begin inhuming bodies occurred because families believed that inhumation was a kinder, and less disturbing burial rite than cremation, thus necessitating a shift in burial monument.\n\nAlthough grave altars and ash chests virtually disappeared from the market in the second century, aspects of their decoration endured in some stylistic elements of sarcophagi. The largest stylistic group of early sarcophagi in the second century is garland sarcophagi, a custom of decoration that was previously used on ash chests and grave altars. Though the premise of the decoration is the same, there are some differences. The garland supports are often human figures instead of the animal heads used previously. In addition, specific mythological scenes fill the field, rather than small birds or other minor scenes. The inscription panel on garland ash altars and chests is also missing on garland sarcophagi. When a sarcophagus did have an inscription, it seemed to be an extra addition and usually ran along the top edge of the chest or between the decorations. The fact that early garland sarcophagi continued the tradition of grave altars with decorated garlands suggests that the customers and sculptors of sarcophagi had similar approaches to those who purchased and produced grave altars. Both monuments employed a similar collection of stylistic motifs with only subtle shifts in iconography.\n\nSarcophagi production of the ancient Roman Empire involved three main parties: the customer, the sculpting workshop that carved the monument, and the quarry-based workshop that supplied the materials. The distance between these parties was highly variable due to the extensive size of the Empire. Metropolitan Roman, Attic, and Asiatic were the three major regional types of sarcophagi that dominated trade throughout the Roman Empire. Although they were divided into regions, the production of sarcophagi was not as simple as it might appear. For example, Attic workshops were close to Mount Pentelikon, the source of their materials, but were usually very far from their client. The opposite was true for the workshops of Metropolitan Rome, who tended to import large, roughed out sarcophagi from distant quarries in order to complete their commissions. Depending on distance and customer request (some customers might choose to have elements of their sarcophagi left unfinished until a future date, introducing the possibility of further work after the main commission), sarcophagi were in many different stages of production during transport. As a result, it is difficult to develop a standardized model of production.\n\nRome was the primary production center in the western part of the empire. A Metropolitan Roman sarcophagus often took the shape of a low rectangular box with a flat lid. As the sarcophagus was usually placed in a niche or against a wall in a mausoleum, they were usually only decorated on the front and two shorter sides. Many were decorated with carvings of garlands and fruits and leaves, as well as narrative scenes from Greek mythology. Battle and hunting scenes, biographical events from the life of the deceased, portrait busts, the profession of the deceased and abstract designs were also popular.\n\nAthens was the main production center for Attic style sarcophagi. These workshops mainly produced sarcophagi for export. They were rectangular in shape and were often decorated on all four sides, unlike the Metropolitan Roman style, with ornamental carvings along the bottom and upper edge of the monument. The lids were also different from the flat metropolitan Roman style and featured a pitched gable roof, or a kline lid, which is carved in the style of couch cushions on which the form of the deceased reclines. The great majority of these sarcophagi also featured mythological subjects, especially the Trojan War, Achilles, and battles with the Amazons.\n\nThe Dokimeion workshops in Phrygia specialized in architecturally formed large-scale Asiatic sarcophagi. Many featured a series of columns joined together by an entablature on all four sides with human figures in the area between the columns. The lids were often made in the gabled-roof design in order to complete the architectural-style sarcophagi so the coffin formed a sort of house or temple for the deceased. Other cities in Asia Minor produced sarcophagi of the garland tradition as well. In general, the sarcophagi were decorated on either three or four sides, depending on whether they were to be displayed on a pedestal in an open-air setting or against the walls inside tombs.\n\nA transition from the classical garland and seasonal reliefs with smaller mythological figures to a greater focus on full mythological scenes began with the break up of the classical style in the late second century towards the end of Marcus Aurelius' reign. This shift led to the development of popular themes and meanings portrayed through mythological scenes and allegories. The most popular mythological scenes on Roman sarcophagi functioned as aids to mourning, visions of life and happiness, and opportunities for self-portrayal for Roman citizens.\n\nImages of Meleager, the hero who slew the Calydonian Boar, being mourned by his lover and hunting companion Atlanta, as well as images of Achilles mourning Patroclus were very common on sarcophagi that acted as grieving aids. In both cases, the mythological scenes were akin to mourning practices of ordinary Roman citizens in an effort to reflect their grief and comfort them when they visited the tomb. Playful images depicting Nereids, Dionysiac triumphs, and love scenes of Dionysus and Ariadne were also commonly represented on sarcophagi. It is possible that these scenes of happiness and love in the face of death and mourning encouraged the living to enjoy life while they could, and reflected the celebration and meals that the mourners would later enjoy in the tomb when they returned to visit the deceased. The third century involved the return in popularity of self-representation on Roman sarcophagi.\n\nThere were several different ways Roman citizens approached self-representation on sarcophagi. Some sarcophagi had actual representations of the face or full figure of the deceased. In other cases, mythological portraits were used to connect characteristics of the deceased with traits of the hero or heroine portrayed. For example, common mythological portraits of deceased women identified them with women of lauded traits in myth, such as the devoted Selene or loyal Alcestis. Scenes featuring the figures of Meleager and Achilles expressed bravery and were often produced on sarcophagi holding deceased men. Biographical scenes that emphasize the true virtues of Roman citizens were also used to commemorate the deceased. Scholars argue that these biographical scenes as well as the comparisons to mythological characters suggest that self-portrayal on Roman sarcophagi did not exist to celebrate the traits of the deceased, but rather to emphasize favored Roman cultural values and demonstrate that the family of the deceased were educated members of the elite that could understand difficult mythological allegories.\n\nThe breakup of the classical style led to a period in which full mythological reliefs with an increase in the number of figures and an elongation of forms became more popular, as discussed above. The proportion of figures on the reliefs also became increasingly unbalanced, with the main figures taking up the greatest area with smaller figures crowded in the small pockets of empty space. In the third century, another transition in theme and style of sarcophagi involved the return in popularity of representing mythological and non-mythological portraits of the deceased. Imagery of the four seasons also becomes popular during the third and fourth centuries. With the advent of Christianity in the third century, traditional motifs, like the seasons, remained, and images representing a belief in the afterlife appeared. The change in style brought by Christianity is perhaps most significant, as it signals a change in emphasis on images of retrospection, and introduced images of an afterlife.\n\nDetails from sarcophagus reliefs\n\nSarcophagi personalization is the customization of a sarcophagus to display the attributes, achievements, or history of the deceased through art and/or inscriptions. The key way sarcophagi were personalized were through portraiture where a mythological character would be carved with the facial features of the deceased. Because many sarcophagi were made in advance of being bought several examples of unfinished portrait heads remain. \n\nThe sculpted scene on the front of the coffin shows the deceased in the Underworld between two Charuns (Etruscan death demons) in which signified that his journey to the afterlife was successful. On the lid, Pulena is shown laid across, in a reclining position, resting on his left arm and in front of him, a list of his life’s achievements which were inscribed on an open scroll.\n\nThe Asiatic sarcophagus with kline portrait of a woman also carried an Etruscan influence of sculpting portraiture on the lid. Made of marble, with reliefs on all four sides of the box (a feature in Eastern Sarcophagi production), and sculpted mini statues of Greek gods and heroes in frames are depicted. The lid displays a portrait of the woman with Cupid (right end) and a little dog (in which the paws only remain at the left end).\n\nThe Portonaccio sarcophagus is an example of one of a group of about twenty-five late Roman battle sarcophagi, with one exception all apparently dating to 170-210, made in Rome or in some cases Athens. These derive from Hellenistic monuments from Pergamon in Asia Minor showing Pergamene victories over the Gauls, and were all presumably commissioned for military commanders. The Portonaccio sarcophagus is the best known and most elaborate of the main Antonine group, and shows both considerable similarities to the Great Ludovisi sarcophagus, the late outlier from about 250, and a considerable contrast in style and mood.\n\nThe face of the general is unfinished, either because the sculptors awaited a model to work from, or they had produced the work speculatively with no specific commission. The general and his wife are also each shown twice on the lid frieze, together holding each other's hands at the centre, and singly at the ends, again with unfinished faces.\nThe unusually large Ludovisi Battle sarcophagus shows a chaotic battle scene between the Romans and barbarian foes. At the centre, a young general wears no helmet nor wields any weapon and has emblem of Mithras, the Persian god of light, truth, and victory over death carved into his forehead. Several scholars have identified him as one of the sons of Trajan Decius, who died of plague.\n\nA sarcophagus from the church of Santa Maria Antiqua with philosopher, orant, and Old and New Testament scenes is Early Christian art in which displays the story of Jonah on the left one-third, heads of a praying woman and a seated man reading from a scroll which are unfinished (intended to be portraits of the deceased) in the center, and continuing on, Christ as Good Shepherd, and the baptism of Christ.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "20603258", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20603258", "title": "Stick candy", "text": "Stick candy\n\nStick candy (also called candy stick, barber pole candy, circus stick, or barber pole) is a long, cylindrical variety of hard candy, usually four to seven inches in length and 1/4 to 1/2 inch in diameter, but in some extraordinary cases up to 14 inches in length and two inches in diameter. Like candy canes, they usually have at least two different colors (either opaque or translucent) swirled together in a spiral pattern, resembling a barber's pole.\n\nThe candy has a long history in the United States, where it is believed to have been developed, and is often marketed as an \"old fashioned\" candy. It is often sold in general stores and similar shops specializing in nostalgia items. The Cracker Barrel chain estimates that its stores sell a total length of of stick candy each year.\n\nStick candy has been around since at least the fall of year 1837 when it was shown at the Exhibition of the Massachusetts Charitable Mechanic Association alongside \"lobster candy\". Stick candy was popular with both children and adults in the U.S. as early as the 1860s, and the selling of this type of candy (particularly during the carnival season in the warmer months) was described as being lucrative. One contemporary account describes broken pieces of stick candy being sold in paper containers, being presented by candy sellers to rural people as something special, and commanding a high price.\n\nCandy sticks were the subject of an 1885 song called \"The Candy Stick\":\n\nStick candy was the subject of a poem, \"Stick-Candy Days\", from the 1907 collection \"A Rose of the Old Regime: And other Poems of Home-Love and Childhood\" by the Bentztown Bard (Folger McKinsey). The first two verses are:\n\nStick candy is also mentioned in a 1909 poem, \"The Land of Candy\", by Madison Julius Cawein:\n\nStick candy is produced by mixing granulated sugar (and sometimes also corn syrup) with water and a small amount of cream of tartar. The dough is mixed with color and flavoring, then drawn and twisted, producing the characteristic spiral pattern, and finally cut to the proper length and allowed to cool and harden.\n\nIn the 1800s, bright red (and sometimes also bright blue) swirled with white were the most common colors. Although unbent and thicker, it is similar to a candy cane (which retains the aforementioned red-and-white color scheme).\n\nStick candy is produced in a wide assortment of flavors, such as root beer, sassafras, horehound, cinnamon, butterscotch, piña colada, peppermint, clove, spearmint, licorice, bubble gum, cotton candy, and wintergreen. They are also made in a wide variety of fruit and berry flavors. There are also varieties containing two different flavors swirled together.\n\nStick candy is generally sold shrink-wrapped in clear plastic, and traditionally displayed for sale in wide-mouthed glass jars.\nThey were originally sold by the piece for a nickel or dime. As of 2008 they more typically sell for 25 cents to 75 cents each, although they are also sold in bulk.\n\nSome varieties of stick candy are filled with sweet cream.\n\nAs a hard candy, stick candy is slow to dissolve and candy sticks last a very long time if consumed by sucking. As with lollipops, they are most often consumed by sucking, but may also be crushed by the teeth.\n\nStick candy is sometimes used as an ingredient in other foods: crushed and used in ice cream pudding, or frosting, or cut into thin slices and used as a topping for cakes. It can also be used in other candy, particularly in combination with chocolate.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "20615842", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20615842", "title": "Milleens", "text": "Milleens\n\nMilleens is an Irish farmhouse cheese. It was first made in Eyeries, County Cork, Ireland. In 1976, Milleens was first produced by Norman and Veronica Steele. Milleens cheese matures within four to ten weeks after it is produced. In 1997, it was the winner of the Supreme Champion at the British Cheese Awards held at Chelsea Barracks.\n\n"}
{"id": "20623218", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20623218", "title": "Pirog", "text": "Pirog\n\nPirog (, pl. \"pirogi\" пироги ; ; ; pl. \"pīrāgi\"; \"pyrih\", pl. \"pyrohy\" пироги) is a baked case of dough with a sweet or savoury filling. Pirogi are common in Eastern European cuisines. Pirogi are characterised as \"the most popular and important dish\" and \"truly national goods\" of Russian cuisine, \"ubiquitous in Russian life\".\n\nThe name is derived from the ancient Proto-Slavic word \"pir\", meaning \"banquet\" or \"festivity\". The Russian plural \"pirogi\" with the stress on the last syllable should not be confused with pierogi (stress on \"o\" in Polish and English) in Polish cuisine, which are similar to the Russian pelmeni or Ukrainian varenyky.\n\nPirogi come in different shapes and forms: they are often oblong with tapering ends, but can also be circular or rectangular. They can be closed or open-faced with no crust on top.\n\nPirogi are usually made from yeast-raised dough which distinguishes them from pies and pastries common in other cuisines. In former times, the dough for Russian pirogi was made predominantly of rye flour. Later it was mixed with wheat flour. Nowadays, mainly wheat flour is used.\n\nThere are also variants made from shortcrust, flaky or puff pastry. In East-Slavic languages pirog is a generic term which denotes virtually any kind of pie, pastry, or cake. Тhus, Karelian pastry (known as \"Karelian pirog\" in Russian), knish or charlotte are considered types of pirog in Eastern Europe.\n\nThe filling for pirogi may be sweet and contain quark or cottage cheese, fruits like apples, plums or various berries, as well as honey, nuts or poppy seeds. Savoury versions may consist of meat, fish, mushrooms, cabbage, rice, buckwheat groats or potato. In Ukrainian and Russian cuisines, pyrohy (as well as their smaller versions called pirozhki) with a savoury filling are traditionally served as an accompaniment with clear borscht, broth or consommé.\n\nCertain types of pirog are known by different names:\n\nSimilar West Slavic pastries, such as Czech and Slovak Kolach, and Polish Kołacz, usually have sweet fillings.\n\n\n"}
