{"id": "601859", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=601859", "title": "Cruller", "text": "Cruller\n\nA cruller , , is a deep-fried pastry popular in the USA and Canada often made from a rectangle of dough, with a cut made in the middle that allows it to be pulled over and through itself producing twists in the sides of the pastry. Crullers have been described as resembling \"a small, braided torpedo\". Some other cruller styles are made of a denser dough somewhat like that of a cake doughnut formed in a small loaf or stick shape, but not always twisted. Crullers may be topped with plain powdered sugar; powdered sugar mixed with cinnamon; or icing.\n\nA French cruller is a fluted, ring-shaped doughnut made from choux pastry with a light airy texture. The French cruller is called a \"spritzkuchen\" in German.\n\nThe name comes from early 19th century Dutch \"kruller\", from \"krullen\" 'to curl'. In northern Germany they are known as \"hirschhörner\" (deer horns) based on one of the leavening agents baker's ammonia, which is called \"hirschhornsalz\" in German. (The other leavening agent is carbonate of potash.) They are traditionally baked on New Year's Eve as a family project with the kids doing the labor intensive shaping and the grown ups handling the deep frying. In Danish they are known as \"klejner\" and in Swedish as \"klenäter\", both names deriving from Low German. In Scandinavia crullers are common at Christmas. In the US various shapes of pastries are known as crullers. Some forms of those crullers are what is traditionally eaten in Germany and some other European countries on Shrove Tuesday, to use up fat before Lent. \n\nThe term \"Chinese cruller\" is occasionally applied to the youtiao (), a similar-looking fried dough food eaten in East and Southeast Asia. The term cruller is also associated with the mahua (). Mahua is a type of twisted fried dough much denser and sweeter than youtiao.\n\nThe \"Aberdeen crulla\" is a traditional Scottish pastry made in the same way as the rectangular, plaited cruller of New England. It is first attested in Edinburgh in 1829 and is thought to copied from the 'cruller' of the United States according to the Scottish National Dictionary (1931–1976). Distinct from this, the \"yum-yum\" is a commonly available treat in Scotland, which resembles a straightened French cruller coated in thin glacé icing.\n\nIn 1909 a US author published her belief that crullers were invented in the New World in 1617 by Sebastian Croll, due to the perceived similarity of the names according to her.\n\nThey were referenced in \"The Wizard of Oz\" when Aunt Em offered them to Hunk, Hickory, and Zeke after scolding them for being \"three shiftless farmhands\". The twisted shape of the crullers might have been a metaphor for tornadoes as the same scene references other metaphors which influenced Dorothy's subsequent dream.\n\nCrullers are most commonly found in Canada, New England, the Mid-Atlantic and North Central states of the United States, but are also common in California. The German origin is probably why traditional crullers can be found more easily in the Midwest, where many German immigrants settled. Some family-owned bakeries still call them \"krullers.\" In other parts of the U.S., crullers may be called \"dunking sticks\" or simply \"sticks.\"\n\nIn 2003, the Dunkin' Donuts chain of doughnut shops stopped carrying traditional crullers, claiming that the hand-shaped rectangular treats were too labor-intensive, and couldn't be simulated with new machines for mixing doughnut batter. The company still sells \"French crullers\" which can be formed by a kind of extruding nozzle.\n\nTim Hortons, and Honey Dew Donuts still sell the Cruller doughnut. Krispy Kreme sell something that they call a cruller, but in reality it is just a molded/formed cake (or Old Fashioned) doughnut. In place of the traditional cruller, Dunkin' Donuts now sells several variations of a substitute product it calls a \"cake stick\" which is a simplified, machine-made version of the more elaborately twisted, hand-made variety. In the southeastern U.S., French crullers are a fresh-baked everyday bakery item at Publix grocery stores.\n\nIn 1973, the French cruller became available in Mister Donut stores in Japan.\n"}
{"id": "602599", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=602599", "title": "Maultasche", "text": "Maultasche\n\nOn 22 October 2009, the European Union recognized (' or ') as a \"regional specialty\" and remarked that the dish is significant to the cultural heritage of Baden-Württemberg. This measure provides protection to the integrity of the dish, mandating that genuine are only produced in Swabia, a historical region that was incorporated into the modern German states of Baden-Württemberg and Bavaria.\n\nIn Swabia, are the traditional dish associated with the Lenten commemoration of Maundy Thursday and Good Friday. During Lent, Catholics and other Christians are encouraged to refrain from eating meat. However, are humorously associated with these days because the meat in the dish is concealed under the pasta dough and cannot be seen by God. Among the anecdotal stories regarding the origin of the dish, one claims that were created by the Cistercian monks of Maulbronn Abbey for that purpose. Indeed, a Swabian German nickname for the dish, \", means \"small God-cheaters\".\n\nOne of the earliest mentions of the name is associated with several recipes in a 1794 cookbook—however, these are recipes for sweet desserts, and not a savory meat-filled entree.\n\nThe name is a compound word and could derive from three possible meanings: The first being that ' comes from the combination of the noun ' referring to the mouth of an animal and ', which means \"bag.\" Thus, literally would mean \"feedbag\"—as in a bag used for feeding livestock—and probably derives this name from its appearance. The second meaning could be that from an archaic word — either ' or '—for a \"slap in the face.\" If this were its origins, the name could be a comparison between a swollen cheek after being slapped with the shape and appearance of the dish. The third explanation might be just a reference to Maulbronn Abbey and be short for '.\n\n are traditionally prepared in two ways, either:\n\nSome recipes for use bacon for the meat filling.\n\nSome German descendents in Southwest Wisconsin make a dessert of the same name. Its ingredients include flour, eggs, apples and cinnamon. Due to its visual similarities to the sliced dinner version is the explanation for dessert dish's name.\n\n"}
{"id": "604727", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=604727", "title": "Coffee", "text": "Coffee\n\nCoffee is a brewed drink prepared from roasted coffee beans, the seeds of berries from certain \"Coffea\" species. The genus \"Coffea\" is native to tropical Africa (specifically having its origin in Ethiopia and Sudan) and Madagascar, the Comoros, Mauritius, and Réunion in the Indian Ocean. Coffee plants are now cultivated in over 70 countries, primarily in the equatorial regions of the Americas, Southeast Asia, Indian subcontinent, and Africa. The two most commonly grown are \"C. arabica\" and \"C. robusta\". Once ripe, coffee berries are picked, processed, and dried. Dried coffee seeds (referred to as \"beans\") are roasted to varying degrees, depending on the desired flavor. Roasted beans are ground and then brewed with near-boiling water to produce the beverage known as coffee.\n\nCoffee is darkly colored, bitter, slightly acidic and has a stimulating effect in humans, primarily due to its caffeine content. It is one of the most popular drinks in the world, and it can be prepared and presented in a variety of ways (e.g., espresso, French press, café latte). It is usually served hot, although iced coffee is a popular alternative. Clinical studies indicate that moderate coffee consumption is benign or mildly beneficial in healthy adults, with continuing research on whether long-term consumption lowers the risk of some diseases, although those long-term studies are of generally poor quality.\n\nThe earliest credible evidence of coffee-drinking appears in modern-day Yemen in southern Arabia in the middle of the 15th century in Sufi shrines. It was here in Arabia that coffee seeds were first roasted and brewed in a similar way to how it is now prepared. But the coffee seeds had to be first exported from East Africa to Yemen, as the \"Coffea arabica\" plant is thought to have been indigenous to the former. The Yemenis obtained their coffee via Somali traders from Berbera (who in turn procured the beans from the Ethiopian Highlands) and began to cultivate the seed. By the 16th century, the drink had reached Persia, Turkey, and North Africa. From there, it spread to Europe and the rest of the world.\n\n, Brazil was the leading grower of coffee beans, producing one-third of the world total. Coffee is a major export commodity, being the top legal agricultural export for numerous countries. It is one of the most valuable commodities exported by developing countries. Green, unroasted coffee is one of the most traded agricultural commodities in the world. Some controversy has been associated with coffee cultivation and the way developed countries trade with developing nations, as well as the impact on the environment with regards to the clearing of land for coffee-growing and water use. Consequently, the markets for fair trade and organic coffee are expanding, notably in the USA.\n\nThe word \"coffee\" entered the English language in 1582 via the Dutch \"koffie\", borrowed from the Ottoman Turkish \"kahve\", borrowed in turn from the Arabic \"qahwah\" ().\n\nThe Arabic word \"qahwah\" was traditionally held to refer to a type of wine whose etymology is given by Arab lexicographers as deriving from the verb \"qahiya\" (قَهِيَ), \"to lack hunger\", in reference to the drink's reputation as an appetite suppressant. It has also been proposed that the source may be the Proto-Central Semitic root q-h-h meaning \"dark\".\n\nAlternatively, the word Khat, a plant widely used as a stimulant in Yemen and Ethiopia before being supplanted by coffee has been suggested as a possible origin, or the Arabic word \"quwwah\" (meaning \"strength\"). It may also come from the Kingdom of Kaffa in southeast Ethiopia where Coffea arabica grows wild, but this is considered less likely; in the local Kaffa language, the coffee plant is instead called \"bunno\".\n\nThe expression \"coffee break\" was first attested in 1952. The term \"coffee pot\" dates from 1705.\n\nAccording to legend, ancestors of today's Oromo people in a region of Kaffa in Ethiopia were believed to have been the first to recognize the energizing effect of the coffee plant. However, there is no direct evidence that has been found earlier than the 15th century indicating where in Africa coffee first grew or who among the native populations might have used it as a stimulant. The story of Kaldi, the 9th-century Ethiopian goatherd who discovered coffee when he noticed how excited his goats became after eating the beans from a coffee plant, did not appear in writing until 1671 and is probably apocryphal.\n\nOther accounts attribute the discovery of coffee to Sheikh Omar. According to an ancient chronicle (preserved in the Abd-Al-Kadir manuscript), Omar, who was known for his ability to cure the sick through prayer, was once exiled from Mocha in Yemen to a desert cave near Ousab (modern-day Wusab, about east of Zabid). Starving, Omar chewed berries from nearby shrubbery but found them to be bitter. He tried roasting the seeds to improve the flavor, but they became hard. He then tried boiling them to soften the seed, which resulted in a fragrant brown liquid. Upon drinking the liquid Omar was revitalized and sustained for days. As stories of this \"miracle drug\" reached Mocha, Omar was asked to return and was made a saint.\n\nThe earliest credible evidence of coffee-drinking or knowledge of the coffee tree appears in the middle of the 15th century in the accounts of Ahmed al-Ghaffar in Yemen. It was here in Arabia that coffee seeds were first roasted and brewed, in a similar way to how it is prepared now. Coffee was used by Sufi circles to stay awake for their religious rituals. Accounts differ on the origin of the coffee plant prior to its appearance in Yemen. From Ethiopia, coffee could have been introduced to Yemen via trade across the Red Sea. One account credits Muhammad Ibn Sa'd for bringing the beverage to Aden from the African coast. Other early accounts say Ali ben Omar of the Shadhili Sufi order was the first to introduce coffee to Arabia. According to al Shardi, Ali ben Omar may have encountered coffee during his stay with the Adal king Sadadin's companions in 1401. Famous 16th-century Islamic scholar Ibn Hajar al-Haytami notes in his writings of a beverage called qahwa developed from a tree in the Zeila region. Coffee was first exported out of Ethiopia to Yemen by Somali merchants from Berbera. In addition, Mocha, which was the centre of the coffee trade for much of the early modern era, obtained most of their coffee from Somali merchants based in Berbera.\nBy the 16th century, coffee had reached the rest of the Middle East, Persia, Turkey, and northern Africa. The first coffee seeds were smuggled out of the Middle East was by Sufi Baba Budan from Yemen to the Indian subcontinent in 1670. Before then, all exported coffee was boiled or otherwise sterilised. Portraits of Baba Budan depict him as having smuggled seven coffee seeds by strapping them to his chest. The first plants grown from these smuggled seeds were planted in Mysore. \nCoffee then spread to Italy, and to the rest of Europe, to Indonesia, and to the Americas.\n\nIn 1583, Leonhard Rauwolf, a German physician, gave this description of coffee after returning from a ten-year trip to the Near East:\nFrom the Middle East, coffee spread to Italy. The thriving trade between Venice and North Africa, Egypt, and the Middle East brought many goods, including coffee, to the Venetian port. From Venice, it was introduced to the rest of Europe. Coffee became more widely accepted after it was deemed a Christian beverage by Pope Clement VIII in 1600, despite appeals to ban the \"Muslim drink.\" The first European coffee house opened in Rome in 1645.\n\nThe Dutch East India Company was the first to import coffee on a large scale. The Dutch later grew the crop in Java and Ceylon. The first exports of Indonesian coffee from Java to the Netherlands occurred in 1711.\n\nThrough the efforts of the British East India Company, coffee became popular in England as well. John Evelyn recorded tasting the drink at Oxford in England in a diary entry of May 1637 to where it had been brought by an Ottoman student of Balliol College from Crete named Nathaniel Conopios of Crete. Oxford's Queen's Lane Coffee House, established in 1654, is still in existence today. Coffee was introduced in France in 1657, and in Austria and Poland after the 1683 Battle of Vienna, when coffee was captured from supplies of the defeated Turks.\n\nWhen coffee reached North America during the Colonial period, it was initially not as successful as it had been in Europe as alcoholic beverages remained more popular. During the Revolutionary War, the demand for coffee increased so much that dealers had to hoard their scarce supplies and raise prices dramatically; this was also due to the reduced availability of tea from British merchants, and a general resolution among many Americans to avoid drinking tea following the 1773 Boston Tea Party. After the War of 1812, during which Britain temporarily cut off access to tea imports, the Americans' taste for coffee grew.\n\nDuring the 18th century, coffee consumption declined in England, giving way to tea-drinking. The latter beverage was simpler to make, and had become cheaper with the British conquest of India and the tea industry there. During the Age of Sail, seamen aboard ships of the British Royal Navy made substitute coffee by dissolving burnt bread in hot water.\n\nThe Frenchman Gabriel de Clieu took a coffee plant to the French territory of Martinique in the Caribbean , from which much of the world's cultivated arabica coffee is descended. Coffee thrived in the climate and was conveyed across the Americas. Coffee was cultivated in Saint-Domingue (now Haiti) from 1734, and by 1788 it supplied half the world's coffee. The conditions that the slaves worked in on coffee plantations were a factor in the soon to follow Haitian Revolution. The coffee industry never fully recovered there. It made a brief come-back in 1949 when Haiti was the world's 3rd largest coffee exporter, but fell quickly into rapid decline.\n\nMeanwhile, coffee had been introduced to Brazil in 1727, although its cultivation did not gather momentum until independence in 1822. After this time massive tracts of rainforest were cleared for coffee plantations, first in the vicinity of Rio de Janeiro and later São Paulo. Brazil went from having essentially no coffee exports in 1800, to being a significant regional producer in 1830, to being the largest producer in the world by 1852. In 1910–20, Brazil exported around 70% of the world's coffee, Colombia, Guatemala, and Venezuela, exported half of the remaining 30%, and Old World production accounted for less than 5% of world exports.\n\nCultivation was taken up by many countries in Central America in the latter half of the 19th century, and almost all involved the large-scale displacement and exploitation of the indigenous people. Harsh conditions led to many uprisings, coups and bloody suppression of peasants. The notable exception was Costa Rica, where lack of ready labor prevented the formation of large farms. Smaller farms and more egalitarian conditions ameliorated unrest over the 19th and 20th centuries.\n\nRapid growth in coffee production in South America during the second half of the 19th century was matched by growth in consumption in developed countries, though nowhere has this growth been as pronounced as in the United States, where high rate of population growth was compounded by doubling of per capita consumption between 1860 and 1920. Though the United States was not the heaviest coffee-drinking nation at the time (Nordic countries, Belgium, and Netherlands all had comparable or higher levels of per capita consumption), due to its sheer size, it was already the largest consumer of coffee in the world by 1860, and, by 1920, around half of all coffee produced worldwide was consumed in the US.\n\nCoffee has become a vital cash crop for many developing countries. Over one hundred million people in developing countries have become dependent on coffee as their primary source of income. It has become the primary export and backbone for African countries like Uganda, Burundi, Rwanda, and Ethiopia, as well as many Central American countries.\n\nSeveral species of shrub of the genus \"Coffea\" produce the berries from which coffee is extracted. The two main species commercially cultivated are \"Coffea canephora\" (predominantly a form known as 'robusta') and \"C. arabica\". \"C. arabica\", the most highly regarded species, is native to the southwestern highlands of Ethiopia and the Boma Plateau in southeastern Sudan and possibly Mount Marsabit in northern Kenya. \"C. canephora\" is native to western and central Subsaharan Africa, from Guinea to Uganda and southern Sudan. Less popular species are \"C. liberica\", \"C. stenophylla\", \"C. mauritiana\", and \"C. racemosa\".\n\nAll coffee plants are classified in the large family Rubiaceae. They are evergreen shrubs or trees that may grow 5 m (15 ft) tall when unpruned. The leaves are dark green and glossy, usually 10–15 cm (4–6 in) long and 6 cm (2.4 in) wide, simple, entire, and opposite. Petioles of opposite leaves fuse at the base to form interpetiolar stipules, characteristic of Rubiaceae. The flowers are axillary, and clusters of fragrant white flowers bloom simultaneously. Gynoecium consists of an inferior ovary, also characteristic of Rubiaceae. The flowers are followed by oval berries of about 1.5 cm (0.6 in). When immature they are green, and they ripen to yellow, then crimson, before turning black on drying. Each berry usually contains two seeds, but 5–10% of the berries have only one; these are called peaberries. Arabica berries ripen in six to eight months, while robusta takes nine to eleven months.\n\n\"Coffea arabica\" is predominantly self-pollinating, and as a result, the seedlings are generally uniform and vary little from their parents. In contrast, \"Coffea canephora\", and \"C. liberica\" are self-incompatible and require outcrossing. This means that useful forms and hybrids must be propagated vegetatively. Cuttings, grafting, and budding are the usual methods of vegetative propagation. On the other hand, there is great scope for experimentation in search of potential new strains.\n\nIn 2016, Oregon State University entomologist George Poinar, Jr. announced the discovery of a new plant species that's a 45-million-year-old relative of coffee found in amber. Named \"Strychnos electri\", after the Greek word for amber (electron), the flowers represent the first-ever fossils of an asterid, which is a clade of flowering plants that not only later gave us coffee, but also sunflowers, peppers, potatoes, mint – and deadly poisons.\n\nThe traditional method of planting coffee is to place 20 seeds in each hole at the beginning of the rainy season. This method loses about 50% of the seeds' potential, as about half fail to sprout. A more effective process of growing coffee, used in Brazil, is to raise seedlings in nurseries that are then planted outside at six to twelve months. Coffee is often intercropped with food crops, such as corn, beans, or rice during the first few years of cultivation as farmers become familiar with its requirements. Coffee plants grow within a defined area between the tropics of Cancer and Capricorn, termed the bean belt or coffee belt.\n\nOf the two main species grown, arabica coffee (from \"C. arabica\") is generally more highly regarded than robusta coffee (from \"C. canephora\"). Robusta coffee tends to be bitter and have less flavor but better body than arabica. For these reasons, about three-quarters of coffee cultivated worldwide is \"C. arabica\". Robusta strains also contain about 40–50% more caffeine than arabica. Consequently, this species is used as an inexpensive substitute for arabica in many commercial coffee blends. Good quality robusta beans are used in traditional Italian espresso blends to provide a full-bodied taste and a better foam head (known as \"crema\").\n\nAdditionally, \"Coffea canephora\" is less susceptible to disease than \"C. arabica\" and can be cultivated in lower altitudes and warmer climates where \"C. arabica\" will not thrive. The robusta strain was first collected in 1890 from the Lomani River, a tributary of the Congo River, and was conveyed from the Congo Free State (now the Democratic Republic of the Congo) to Brussels to Java around 1900. From Java, further breeding resulted in the establishment of robusta plantations in many countries. In particular, the spread of the devastating coffee leaf rust (\"Hemileia vastatrix\"), to which \"C. arabica\" is vulnerable, hastened the uptake of the resistant robusta. \"Hemileia vastatrix\" is a fungal pathogen and results in light, rust-colored spots on the undersides of coffee plant leaves. \"Hemileia vastatrix\" grows exclusively on the leaves of coffee pants. Coffee leaf rust is found in virtually all countries that produce coffee.\nMycena citricolor is another threat to coffee plants, primarily in Latin America. Mycena citricolor, commonly referred to as American Leaf Spot, is a fungus that can affect the whole coffee plant. It can grow on leaves, resulting in leaves with holes that often fall from the plant.\n\nOver 900 species of insect have been recorded as pests of coffee crops worldwide. Of these, over a third are beetles, and over a quarter are bugs. Some 20 species of nematodes, 9 species of mites, and several snails and slugs also attack the crop. Birds and rodents sometimes eat coffee berries, but their impact is minor compared to invertebrates. In general, \"arabica\" is the more sensitive species to invertebrate predation overall. Each part of the coffee plant is assailed by different animals. Nematodes attack the roots, coffee borer beetles burrow into stems and woody material, and the foliage is attacked by over 100 species of larvae (caterpillars) of butterflies and moths.\n\nMass spraying of insecticides has often proven disastrous, as predators of the pests are more sensitive than the pests themselves. Instead, integrated pest management has developed, using techniques such as targeted treatment of pest outbreaks, and managing crop environment away from conditions favouring pests. Branches infested with scale are often cut and left on the ground, which promotes scale parasites to not only attack the scale on the fallen branches but in the plant as well.\n\nThe 2-mm-long coffee borer beetle (\"Hypothenemus hampei\") is the most damaging insect pest to the world's coffee industry, destroying up to 50 percent or more of the coffee berries on plantations in most coffee-producing countries. The adult female beetle nibbles a single tiny hole in a coffee berry and lays 35 to 50 eggs. Inside, the offspring grow, mate, and then emerge from the commercially ruined berry to disperse, repeating the cycle. Pesticides are mostly ineffective because the beetle juveniles are protected inside the berry nurseries, but they are vulnerable to predation by birds when they emerge. When groves of trees are nearby, the American yellow warbler, rufous-capped warbler, and other insectivorous birds have been shown to reduce by 50 percent the number of coffee berry borers in Costa Rica coffee plantations.\n\nBeans from different countries or regions can usually be distinguished by differences in flavor, aroma, body, and acidity. These taste characteristics are dependent not only on the coffee's growing region, but also on genetic subspecies (varietals) and processing. Varietals are generally known by the region in which they are grown, such as Colombian, Java and Kona.\n\nArabica coffee beans are cultivated mainly in Latin America, eastern Africa or Asia, while robusta beans are grown in central Africa, throughout southeast Asia, and Brazil.\n\nOriginally, coffee farming was done in the shade of trees that provided a habitat for many animals and insects. Remnant forest trees were used for this purpose, but many species have been planted as well. These include leguminous trees of the genera \"Acacia\", \"Albizia\", \"Cassia\", \"Erythrina\", \"Gliricidia\", \"Inga\", and \"Leucaena\", as well as the nitrogen-fixing non-legume sheoaks of the genus \"Casuarina\", and the silky oak \"Grevillea robusta\".\n\nThis method is commonly referred to as the traditional shaded method, or \"shade-grown\". Starting in the 1970s, many farmers switched their production method to sun cultivation, in which coffee is grown in rows under full sun with little or no forest canopy. This causes berries to ripen more rapidly and bushes to produce higher yields, but requires the clearing of trees and increased use of fertilizer and pesticides, which damage the environment and cause health problems.\n\nUnshaded coffee plants grown with fertilizer yield the most coffee, although unfertilized shaded crops generally yield more than unfertilized unshaded crops: the response to fertilizer is much greater in full sun. While traditional coffee production causes berries to ripen more slowly and produce lower yields, the quality of the coffee is allegedly superior. In addition, the traditional shaded method provides living space for many wildlife species. Proponents of shade cultivation say environmental problems such as deforestation, pesticide pollution, habitat destruction, and soil and water degradation are the side effects of the practices employed in sun cultivation.\n\nThe American Birding Association, Smithsonian Migratory Bird Center, National Arbor Day Foundation, and the Rainforest Alliance have led a campaign for 'shade-grown' and organic coffees, which can be sustainably harvested. Shaded coffee cultivation systems show greater biodiversity than full-sun systems, and those more distant from continuous forest compare rather poorly to undisturbed native forest in terms of habitat value for some bird species.\n\nAnother issue concerning coffee is its use of water. It takes about of water to grow the coffee beans needed to produce one cup of coffee, and coffee is often grown in countries where there is a water shortage, such as Ethiopia.\n\nUsed coffee grounds may be used for composting or as a mulch. They are especially appreciated by worms and acid-loving plants such as blueberries. Some commercial coffee shops run initiatives to make better use of these grounds, including Starbucks' \"Grounds for your Garden\" project, and community sponsored initiatives such as \"Ground to Ground\".\n\nClimate change may significantly impact coffee yields within a few decades. Kew Royal Botanic Gardens concluded that global warming threatens the genetic diversity of Arabica plants found in Ethiopia and surrounding countries.\n\nIn 2016, world production of green coffee beans was 9.2 million tonnes, led by Brazil with 33% of the total (table). Vietnam, Colombia, and Indonesia were other major producers.\n\nCoffee berries and their seeds undergo several processes before they become the familiar roasted coffee. Berries have been traditionally selectively picked by hand; a labor-intensive method, it involves the selection of only the berries at the peak of ripeness. More commonly, crops are strip picked, where all berries are harvested simultaneously regardless of ripeness by person or machine. After picking, green coffee is processed by one of two methods—the dry process method, simpler and less labor-intensive as the berries can be strip picked, and the wet process method, which incorporates fermentation into the process and yields a mild coffee.\n\nThen they are sorted by ripeness and color, and most often the flesh of the berry is removed, usually by machine, and the seeds are fermented to remove the slimy layer of mucilage still present on the seed. When the fermentation is finished, the seeds are washed with large quantities of fresh water to remove the fermentation residue, which generates massive amounts of coffee wastewater. Finally, the seeds are dried.\n\nThe best (but least used) method of drying coffee is using drying tables. In this method, the pulped and fermented coffee is spread thinly on raised beds, which allows the air to pass on all sides of the coffee, and then the coffee is mixed by hand. In this method the drying that takes place is more uniform, and fermentation is less likely. Most African coffee is dried in this manner and certain coffee farms around the world are starting to use this traditional method.\n\nNext, the coffee is sorted, and labeled as green coffee. Some companies use cylinders to pump in heated air to dry the coffee seeds, though this is generally in places where the humidity is very high.\n\nAn Asian coffee known as kopi luwak undergoes a peculiar process made from coffee berries eaten by the Asian palm civet, passing through its digestive tract, with the beans eventually harvested from feces. Coffee brewed from this process is among the most expensive in the world, with bean prices reaching $160 per pound or $30 per brewed cup. Kopi luwak coffee is said to have uniquely rich, slightly smoky aroma and flavor with hints of chocolate, resulting from the action of digestive enzymes breaking down bean proteins to facilitate partial fermentation.\n\nThe next step in the process is the roasting of the green coffee. Coffee is usually sold in a roasted state, and with rare exceptions all coffee is roasted before it is consumed. It can be sold roasted by the supplier, or it can be home roasted. The roasting process influences the taste of the beverage by changing the coffee bean both physically and chemically. The bean decreases in weight as moisture is lost and increases in volume, causing it to become less dense. The density of the bean also influences the strength of the coffee and requirements for packaging.\n\nThe actual roasting begins when the temperature inside the bean reaches approximately , though different varieties of seeds differ in moisture and density and therefore roast at different rates. During roasting, caramelization occurs as intense heat breaks down starches, changing them to simple sugars that begin to brown, which alters the color of the bean.\n\nSucrose is rapidly lost during the roasting process, and may disappear entirely in darker roasts. During roasting, aromatic oils and acids weaken, changing the flavor; at , other oils start to develop. One of these oils, caffeol, is created at about , which is largely responsible for coffee's aroma and flavor.\n\nRoasting is the last step of processing the beans in their intact state. During this last treatment, while still in the bean state, more caffeine breaks down above . Dark roasting is the utmost step in bean processing removing the most caffeine. Although, dark roasting is not to be confused with the Decaffeination process.\n\nDepending on the color of the roasted beans as perceived by the human eye, they will be labeled as light, medium light, medium, medium dark, dark, or very dark. A more accurate method of discerning the degree of roast involves measuring the reflected light from roasted seeds illuminated with a light source in the near-infrared spectrum. This elaborate light meter uses a process known as spectroscopy to return a number that consistently indicates the roasted coffee's relative degree of roast or flavor development.\n\nThe degree of roast has an effect upon coffee flavor and body. Darker roasts are generally bolder because they have less fiber content and a more sugary flavor. Lighter roasts have a more complex and therefore perceived stronger flavor from aromatic oils and acids otherwise destroyed by longer roasting times. Roasting does not alter the amount of caffeine in the bean, but does give less caffeine when the beans are measured by volume because the beans expand during roasting.\n\nA small amount of chaff is produced during roasting from the skin left on the seed after processing. Chaff is usually removed from the seeds by air movement, though a small amount is added to dark roast coffees to soak up oils on the seeds.\n\nDecaffeination of coffee seeds is done while the seeds are still green. Many methods can remove caffeine from coffee, but all involve either soaking the green seeds in hot water (often called the \"Swiss water process\") or steaming them, then using a solvent to dissolve caffeine-containing oils. Decaffeination is often done by processing companies, and the extracted caffeine is usually sold to the pharmaceutical industry.\n\nCoffee is best stored in an airtight container made of ceramic, glass or non-reactive metal. Higher quality prepackaged coffee usually has a one-way valve which prevents air from entering while allowing the coffee to release gases. Coffee freshness and flavor is preserved when it is stored away from moisture, heat, and light. The ability of coffee to absorb strong smells from food means that it should be kept away from such smells. Storage of coffee in refrigerators is not recommended due to the presence of moisture which can cause deterioration. Exterior walls of buildings which face the sun may heat the interior of a home, and this heat may damage coffee stored near such a wall. Heat from nearby ovens also harms stored coffee.\n\nIn 1931, a method of packing coffee in a sealed vacuum in cans was introduced. The roasted coffee was packed and then 99% of the air was removed, allowing the coffee to be stored indefinitely until the can was opened. Today this method is in mass use for coffee in a large part of the world.\n\nCoffee beans must be ground and brewed to create a beverage. The criteria for choosing a method include flavor and economy. Almost all methods of preparing coffee require that the beans be ground and then mixed with hot water long enough to allow the flavor to emerge but not so long as to draw out bitter compounds. The liquid can be consumed after the spent grounds are removed. Brewing considerations include the fineness of grind, the way in which the water is used to extract the flavor, the ratio of coffee grounds to water (the brew ratio), additional flavorings such as sugar, milk, and spices, and the technique to be used to separate spent grounds. Ideal holding temperatures range from to as high as and the ideal serving temperature is . The recommended brew ratio for non-espresso coffee is around 55 to 60 grams of grounds per litre of water, or two level tablespoons for a 5- or 6-ounce cup.\n\nThe roasted coffee beans may be ground at a roastery, in a grocery store, or in the home. Most coffee is roasted and ground at a roastery and sold in packaged form, though roasted coffee beans can be ground at home immediately before consumption. It is also possible, though uncommon, to roast raw beans at home.\n\nCoffee beans may be ground in various ways. A burr grinder uses revolving elements to shear the seed; a blade grinder cuts the seeds with blades moving at high speed; and a mortar and pestle crushes the seeds. For most brewing methods a burr grinder is deemed superior because the grind is more even and the grind size can be adjusted.\n\nThe type of grind is often named after the brewing method for which it is generally used. Turkish grind is the finest grind, while coffee percolator or French press are the coarsest grinds. The most common grinds are between these two extremes: a medium grind is used in most home coffee-brewing machines.\n\nCoffee may be brewed by several methods. It may be boiled, steeped, or pressurized. Brewing coffee by boiling was the earliest method, and Turkish coffee is an example of this method. It is prepared by grinding or pounding the seeds to a fine powder, then adding it to water and bringing it to the boil for no more than an instant in a pot called a \"cezve\" or, in Greek, a \"bríki\". This produces a strong coffee with a layer of foam on the surface and sediment (which is not meant for drinking) settling at the bottom of the cup.\n\nCoffee percolators and automatic coffeemakers brew coffee using gravity. In an automatic coffeemaker, hot water drips onto coffee grounds that are held in a paper, plastic, or perforated metal coffee filter, allowing the water to seep through the ground coffee while extracting its oils and essences. The liquid drips through the coffee and the filter into a carafe or pot, and the spent grounds are retained in the filter.\n\nIn a percolator, boiling water is forced into a chamber above a filter by steam pressure created by boiling. The water then seeps through the grounds, and the process is repeated until terminated by removing from the heat, by an internal timer,\nor by a thermostat that turns off the heater when the entire pot reaches a certain temperature.\n\nCoffee may be brewed by steeping in a device such as a French press (also known as a cafetière, coffee press or coffee plunger). Ground coffee and hot water are combined in a cylindrical vessel and left to brew for a few minutes. A circular filter which fits tightly in the cylinder fixed to a plunger is then pushed down from the top to force the grounds to the bottom. The filter retains the grounds at the bottom as the coffee is poured from the container. Because the coffee grounds are in direct contact with the water, all the coffee oils remain in the liquid, making it a stronger beverage. This method of brewing leaves more sediment than in coffee made by an automatic coffee machine. Supporters of the French press method point out that the sediment issue can be minimized by using the right type of grinder: they claim that a rotary blade grinder cuts the coffee bean into a wide range of sizes, including a fine coffee dust that remains as sludge at the bottom of the cup, while a burr grinder uniformly grinds the beans into consistently-sized grinds, allowing the coffee to settle uniformly and be trapped by the press. Within the first minute of brewing 95% of the caffeine is released from the coffee bean.\n\nThe espresso method forces hot pressurized and vaporized water through ground coffee. As a result of brewing under high pressure (ideally between 9–10 atm), the espresso beverage is more concentrated (as much as 10 to 15 times the quantity of coffee to water as gravity-brewing methods can produce) and has a more complex physical and chemical constitution. A well-prepared espresso has a reddish-brown foam called \"crema\" that floats on the surface. Other pressurized water methods include the moka pot and vacuum coffee maker.\n\nCold brew coffee is made by steeping coarsely ground beans in cold water for several hours, then filtering them. This results in a brew lower in acidity than most hot-brewing methods.\n\nBrewed coffee from typical grounds prepared with tap water contains 40 mg caffeine per 100 gram and no essential nutrients in significant content. In espresso, however, likely due to its higher amount of suspended solids, there are significant contents of magnesium, the B vitamins, niacin and riboflavin, and 212 mg of caffeine per 100 grams of grounds.\n\nOnce brewed, coffee may be served in a variety of ways. Drip-brewed, percolated, or French-pressed/cafetière coffee may be served as \"white coffee\" with a dairy product such as milk or cream, or dairy substitute, or as \"black coffee\" with no such addition. It may be sweetened with sugar or artificial sweetener. When served cold, it is called \"iced coffee\".\n\nEspresso-based coffee has a variety of possible presentations. In its most basic form, an espresso is served alone as a \"shot\" or \"short black\", or with hot water added, when it is known as Caffè Americano. A long black is made by pouring a double espresso into an equal portion of water, retaining the crema, unlike Caffè Americano.\nMilk is added in various forms to an espresso: steamed milk makes a caffè latte, equal parts steamed milk and milk froth make a cappuccino, and a dollop of hot foamed milk on top creates a caffè macchiato. A flat white is prepared by adding steamed hot milk (microfoam) to espresso so that the flavour is brought out and the texture is unusually velvety. It has less milk than a latte but both are varieties of coffee to which the milk can be added in such a way as to create a decorative surface pattern. Such effects are known as latte art.\n\nCoffee can also be incorporated with alcohol to produce a variety of beverages: it is combined with whiskey in Irish coffee, and it forms the base of alcoholic coffee liqueurs such as Kahlúa and Tia Maria. Darker beers such as stout and porter give a chocolate or coffee-like taste due to roasted grains even though actual coffee beans are not added to it.\n\nA number of products are sold for the convenience of consumers who do not want to prepare their own coffee or who do not have access to coffeemaking equipment. Instant coffee is dried into soluble powder or freeze-dried into granules that can be quickly dissolved in hot water. Originally invented in 1907, it rapidly gained in popularity in many countries in the post-war period, with Nescafé being the most popular product. Many consumers determined that the convenience in preparing a cup of instant coffee more than made up for a perceived inferior taste, although, since the late 1970s, instant coffee has been produced differently in such a way that is similar to the taste of freshly brewed coffee. Paralleling (and complementing) the rapid rise of instant coffee was the coffee vending machine invented in 1947 and widely distributed since the 1950s.\n\nCanned coffee has been popular in Asian countries for many years, particularly in China, Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan. Vending machines typically sell varieties of flavored canned coffee, much like brewed or percolated coffee, available both hot and cold. Japanese convenience stores and groceries also have a wide availability of bottled coffee drinks, which are typically lightly sweetened and pre-blended with milk. Bottled coffee drinks are also consumed in the United States.\n\nLiquid coffee concentrates are sometimes used in large institutional situations where coffee needs to be produced for thousands of people at the same time. It is described as having a flavor about as good as low-grade robusta coffee, and costs about 10¢ a cup to produce. The machines can process up to 500 cups an hour, or 1,000 if the water is preheated.\n\nCoffee ingestion on average is about a third of that of tap water in North America and Europe. Worldwide, 6.7 million metric tons of coffee were produced annually in 1998–2000, and the forecast is a rise to seven million metric tons annually by 2010.\n\nBrazil remains the largest coffee exporting nation, however Vietnam tripled its exports between 1995 and 1999 and became a major producer of robusta seeds. Indonesia is the third-largest coffee exporter overall and the largest producer of washed arabica coffee. Organic Honduran coffee is a rapidly growing emerging commodity owing to the Honduran climate and rich soil.\n\nIn 2013, \"The Seattle Times\" reported that global coffee prices dropped more than 50 percent year-over-year. The downward trend continued, and in September 2018 coffee futures dropped to a 12-year low, below the cost of production for many farmers in mountainous regions who cannot use mechanized harvesting methods.\n\nIn Thailand, black ivory coffee beans are fed to elephants whose digestive enzymes reduce the bitter taste of beans collected from dung. These beans sell for up to $1,100 a kilogram ($500 per lb), achieving the world's most expensive coffee some three times costlier than beans harvested from the dung of Asian palm civets.\n\nCoffee is bought and sold as green coffee beans by roasters, investors, and price speculators as a tradable commodity in commodity markets and exchange-traded funds. Coffee futures contracts for Grade 3 washed arabicas are traded on the New York Mercantile Exchange under ticker symbol KC, with contract deliveries occurring every year in March, May, July, September, and December. Coffee is an example of a product that has been susceptible to significant commodity futures price variations. Higher and lower grade arabica coffees are sold through other channels. Futures contracts for robusta coffee are traded on the London International Financial Futures and Options Exchange and, since 2007, on the New York Intercontinental Exchange.\n\nDating to the 1970s, coffee has been incorrectly described by many, including historian Mark Pendergrast, as the world's \"second most legally traded commodity\". Instead, \"coffee was the second most valuable commodity exported by developing countries,\" from 1970 to circa 2000. This fact was derived from the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development Commodity Yearbooks which show \"Third World\" commodity exports by value in the period 1970–1998 as being in order of crude oil in first place, coffee in second, followed by sugar, cotton, and others. Coffee continues to be an important commodity export for developing countries, but more recent figures are not readily available due to the shifting and politicized nature of the category \"developing country\".\n\nInternational Coffee Day, which is claimed to have originated in Japan in 1983 with an event organized by the All Japan Coffee Association, takes place on September 29 in several countries.\n\nOrganizations funded by the coffee industry include the International Coffee Organization, the National Coffee Association and the British Coffee Association.\n\nNordic countries are the highest coffee consuming nations, with consumption in Finland as the world's highest ( per person per year).\n\nA 2017 review of clinical trials found that drinking coffee is generally safe within usual levels of intake and is more likely to improve health outcomes than to cause harm at doses of 3 or 4 cups of coffee daily. Exceptions include possible increased risk in women having bone fractures, and a possible increased risk in pregnant women of fetal loss or decreased birth weight. Results were complicated by poor study quality, and differences in age, gender, health status, and serving size.\n\nIn 2012, the National Institutes of Health–AARP Diet and Health Study analysed the relationship between coffee drinking and mortality. They found that higher coffee consumption was associated with lower risk of death, and that those who drank any coffee lived longer than those who did not. However the authors noted, \"whether this was a causal or associational finding cannot be determined from our data.\" A 2014 meta-analysis found that coffee consumption (4 cups/day) was inversely associated with all-cause mortality (a 16% lower risk), as well as cardiovascular disease mortality specifically (a 21% lower risk from drinking 3 cups/day), but not with cancer mortality. Additional meta-analysis studies corroborated these findings, showing that higher coffee consumption (2–4 cups per day) was associated with a reduced risk of death by all disease causes. An association of coffee drinking with reduced risk for death from various sources was confirmed by a widely cited prospective cohort study of ten European countries in 2017.\n\nModerate coffee consumption is not a risk factor for coronary heart disease. A 2012 meta-analysis concluded that people who drank moderate amounts of coffee had a lower rate of heart failure, with the biggest effect found for those who drank more than four cups a day. A 2014 meta-analysis concluded that cardiovascular disease, such as coronary artery disease and stroke, is less likely with three to five cups of non-decaffeinated coffee per day, but more likely with over five cups per day. A 2016 meta-analysis showed that coffee consumption was associated with a reduced risk of death in patients who have had a myocardial infarction.\n\nDrinking four or more cups of coffee per day does not affect the risk of hypertension compared to drinking little or no coffee; however, drinking one to three cups per day may be at a slightly increased risk.\n\nThe UK NHS advises that avoiding coffee may reduce anxiety. Caffeine, the major active ingredient in coffee, is associated with anxiety. At high doses, typically greater than 300 mg, caffeine can both cause and worsen anxiety. For some people, discontinuing caffeine use can significantly reduce anxiety. Caffeine-induced anxiety disorder is a subclass of substance- or medication-induced anxiety disorder. Populations that may be most impacted by caffeine consumption are adolescents and those already suffering anxiety disorders. Preliminary research indicated the possibility of a beneficial relationship between coffee intake and reduced depression. Long-term preliminary research, including assessment of symptoms for dementia and cognitive impairment, was inconclusive for coffee having an effect in the elderly, mainly due to the poor quality of the studies.\n\nMeta-analyses have consistently found that long-term coffee consumption is associated with a lower risk of Parkinson's disease.\n\nIn a systematic review and meta-analysis of 28 prospective observational studies, representing over one million participants, every additional cup of caffeinated and decaffeinated coffee consumed in a day was associated, respectively, with a 9% and 6% lower risk of type 2 diabetes.\n\nThe effects of coffee consumption on cancer risk remain unclear, with reviews and meta-analyses showing either no relationship or a slightly lower risk of cancer onset. Studies suggest that coffee consumption of 2 cups per/day was associated with a 14% increased risk of developing lung cancer, but only among people who smoke.\n\nOne psychoactive chemical in coffee is caffeine, an adenosine receptor antagonist that is known for its stimulant effects. Coffee also contains the monoamine oxidase inhibitors β-carboline and harmane, which may contribute to its psychoactivity.\n\nIn a healthy liver, caffeine is mostly broken down by hepatic enzymes. The excreted metabolites are mostly paraxanthines—theobromine and theophylline—and a small amount of unchanged caffeine. Therefore, the metabolism of caffeine depends on the state of this enzymatic system of the liver.\n\nPolyphenols in coffee have been shown to affect free radicals in vitro, but there is no evidence that this effect occurs in humans. Polyphenol levels vary depending on how beans are roasted as well as for how long. As interpreted by the Linus Pauling Institute and the European Food Safety Authority, dietary polyphenols, such as those ingested by consuming coffee, have little or no direct antioxidant value following ingestion.\n\nDepending on the type of coffee and method of preparation, the caffeine content of a single serving can vary greatly.\nThe caffeine content of a cup of coffee varies depending mainly on the brewing method, and also on the coffee variety. According to the USDA National Nutrient Database, an 8-ounce (237 ml) cup of \"coffee brewed from grounds\" contains 95 mg caffeine, whereas an espresso (25 ml) contains 53 mg.\n\nAccording to an article in the \"Journal of the American Dietetic Association\", coffee has the following caffeine content, depending on how it is prepared:\n\nWhile the percent of caffeine content in coffee seeds themselves diminishes with increased roast level, the opposite is true for coffee brewed from different grinds and brewing methods using the same proportion of coffee to water volume. The coffee sack (similar to the French press and other steeping methods) extracts more caffeine from dark roasted seeds; the percolator and espresso methods extract more caffeine from light roasted seeds:\n\n\"Coffea arabica\" normally contains about half the caffeine of \"Coffea robusta\". A \"Coffea arabica\" bean containing very little caffeine was discovered in Ethiopia in 2004.\n\nSee Low caffeine coffee.\n\nWidely known as coffeehouses or cafés, establishments serving prepared coffee or other hot beverages have existed for over five hundred years. Coffeehouses in Mecca became a concern as places for political gatherings to the imams who banned them, and the drink, for Muslims between 1512 and 1524. In 1530 the first coffeehouse was opened in Damascus. The first coffeehouse in Constantinople was opened in 1475 by traders arriving from Damascus and Aleppo. Soon after, coffeehouses became part of the Ottoman Culture, spreading rapidly to all regions of the Ottoman Empire.\n\nIn the 17th century, coffee appeared for the first time in Europe outside the Ottoman Empire, and coffeehouses were established and quickly became popular. The first coffeehouses in Western Europe appeared in Venice, as a result of the traffic between La Serenissima and the Ottomans; the very first one is recorded in 1645. The first coffeehouse in England was set up in Oxford in 1650 by a Jewish man named Jacob in the building now known as \"The Grand Cafe\". A plaque on the wall still commemorates this and the cafe is now a cocktail bar. By 1675, there were more than 3,000 coffeehouses in England.\n\nA legend says that after the second Turkish siege of Vienna in 1683, the Viennese discovered many bags of coffee in the abandoned Ottoman encampment. Using this captured stock, a Polish soldier named Kulczycki opened the first coffeehouse in Vienna. This story never happened. Nowadays it is proven that the first coffeehouse in Vienna was opened by the Armenian Johannes Theodat in 1685.\n\nIn 1672 an Armenian named Pascal established a coffee stall in Paris that was ultimately unsuccessful and the city had to wait until 1689 for its first coffeehouse when Procopio Cutò opened the Café Procope. This coffeehouse still exists today and was a major meeting place of the French Enlightenment; Voltaire, Rousseau, and Denis Diderot frequented it, and it is arguably the birthplace of the \"Encyclopédie\", the first modern encyclopedia. America had its first coffeehouse in Boston, in 1676. Coffee, tea and beer were often served together in establishments which functioned both as coffeehouses and taverns; one such was the Green Dragon in Boston, where John Adams, James Otis, and Paul Revere planned rebellion.\nThe modern steamless espresso machine was invented in Milan, Italy, in 1938 by Achille Gaggia, and from there spread in coffeehouses and restaurants across Italy and the rest of Europe in the early 1950s. An Italian named Pino Riservato opened the first espresso bar, the Moka Bar, in Soho in 1952, and there were 400 such bars in London alone by 1956. Cappucino was particularly popular among English drinkers. Similarly in the United States, the espresso craze spread. North Beach in San Francisco saw the opening of the Caffe Trieste in 1957, which served Beat Generation poets such as Allen Ginsberg and Bob Kaufman alongside Italian immigrants. Similar such cafes existed in Greenwich Village and elsewhere.\n\nThe first Peet's Coffee & Tea store opened in 1966 in Berkeley, California by Dutch native Alfred Peet. He chose to focus on roasting batches with fresher, higher quality seeds than was the norm at the time. He was a trainer and supplier to the founders of Starbuck's.\n\nThe American coffeehouse chain Starbucks, which began as a modest business roasting and selling coffee beans in 1971, was founded by three college students, Jerry Baldwin, Gordon Bowker, and Zev Siegl. The first store opened on March 30, 1971 at the Pike Place Market in Seattle, followed by a second and third over the next two years. Entrepreneur Howard Schultz joined the company in 1982 as Director of Retail Operations and Marketing, and pushed to sell premade espresso coffee. The others were reluctant, but Schultz opened Il Giornale in Seattle in April 1986. He bought the other owners out in March 1987 and pushed on with plans to expand—from 1987 to the end of 1991, the chain (rebranded from Il Giornale to Starbucks) expanded to over 100 outlets. The company has 25,000 stores in over 75 countries worldwide.\n\nSouth Korea experienced almost 900 percent growth in the number of coffee shops in the country between 2006 and 2011. The capital city Seoul now has the highest concentration of coffee shops in the world, with more than 10,000 cafes and coffeehouses.\n\nA contemporary term for a person who makes coffee beverages, often a coffeehouse employee, is a \"barista\". The Specialty Coffee Association of Europe and the Specialty Coffee Association of America have been influential in setting standards and providing training.\n\nCoffee is often consumed alongside (or instead of) breakfast by many at home or when eating out at diners or cafeterias. It is often served at the end of a formal meal, normally with a dessert, and at times with an after-dinner mint, especially when consumed at a restaurant or dinner party.\n\nA coffee break in the United States and elsewhere is a short mid-morning rest period granted to employees in business and industry, corresponding with the Commonwealth terms \"elevenses\", \"smoko\" (in Australia), \"morning tea\", \"tea break\", or even just \"tea\". An afternoon coffee break, or afternoon tea, often occurs as well.\n\nThe coffee break originated in the late 19th century in Stoughton, Wisconsin, with the wives of Norwegian immigrants. The city celebrates this every year with the Stoughton Coffee Break Festival. In 1951, \"Time\" noted that \"[s]ince the war, the coffee break has been written into union contracts\". The term subsequently became popular through a Pan-American Coffee Bureau ad campaign of 1952 which urged consumers, \"Give yourself a Coffee-Break – and Get What Coffee Gives to You.\" John B. Watson, a behavioral psychologist who worked with Maxwell House later in his career, helped to popularize coffee breaks within the American culture. Coffee breaks usually last from 10 to 20 minutes and frequently occur at the end of the first third of the work shift. In some companies and some civil service, the coffee break may be observed formally at a set hour. In some places, a cart with hot and cold beverages and cakes, breads and pastries arrives at the same time morning and afternoon, an employer may contract with an outside caterer for daily service, or coffee breaks may take place away from the actual work-area in a designated cafeteria or tea room. More generally, the phrase \"coffee break\" has also come to denote any break from work.\n\nCoffee was initially used for spiritual reasons. At least 1,100 years ago, traders brought coffee across the Red Sea into Arabia (modern-day Yemen), where Muslim dervishes began cultivating the shrub in their gardens. At first, the Arabians made wine from the pulp of the fermented coffee berries. This beverage was known as \"qishr\" (\"kisher\" in modern usage) and was used during religious ceremonies.\n\nCoffee drinking was prohibited by jurists and scholars (\"ulema\") meeting in Mecca in 1511 as \"haraam\", but the subject of whether it was intoxicating was hotly debated over the next 30 years until the ban was finally overturned in the mid-16th century. Use in religious rites among the Sufi branch of Islam led to coffee's being put on trial in Mecca: it was accused of being a heretical substance, and its production and consumption were briefly repressed. It was later prohibited in Ottoman Turkey under an edict by the Sultan Murad IV.\n\nCoffee, regarded as a Muslim drink, was prohibited by Ethiopian Orthodox Christians until as late as 1889; it is now considered a national drink of Ethiopia for people of all faiths. Its early association in Europe with rebellious political activities led to Charles II outlawing coffeehouses from January 1676 (although the uproar created forced the monarch to back down two days before the ban was due to come into force). Frederick the Great banned it in Prussia in 1777 for nationalistic and economic reasons; concerned about the price of import, he sought to force the public back to consuming beer. Lacking coffee-producing colonies, Prussia had to import all its coffee at a great cost.\n\nA contemporary example of religious prohibition of coffee can be found in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The organization holds that it is both physically and spiritually unhealthy to consume coffee. This comes from the Mormon doctrine of health, given in 1833 by founder Joseph Smith in a revelation called the Word of Wisdom. It does not identify coffee by name, but includes the statement that \"hot drinks are not for the belly,\" which has been interpreted to forbid both coffee and tea.\n\nQuite a number of members of the Seventh-day Adventist Church also avoid caffeinated drinks. In its teachings, the Church encourages members to avoid tea, coffee, and other stimulants. Abstinence from coffee, tobacco, and alcohol by many Adventists has afforded a near-unique opportunity for studies to be conducted within that population group on the health effects of coffee drinking, free from confounding factors. One study was able to show a weak but statistically significant association between coffee consumption and mortality from ischemic heart disease, other cardiovascular disease, all cardiovascular diseases combined, and all causes of death.\n\nFor a time, there had been controversy in the Jewish community over whether the coffee seed was a legume and therefore prohibited for Passover. Upon petition from coffeemaker Maxwell House, the coffee seed was classified in 1923 as a berry rather than a seed by orthodox Jewish rabbi Hersch Kohn, and therefore kosher for Passover.\n\nThe concept of fair trade labeling, which guarantees coffee growers a negotiated preharvest price, began in the late 1980s with the Max Havelaar Foundation's labeling program in the Netherlands. In 2004, 24,222 metric tons (of 7,050,000 produced worldwide) were fair trade; in 2005, 33,991 metric tons out of 6,685,000 were fair trade, an increase from 0.34% to 0.51%.\nA number of fair trade impact studies have shown that fair trade coffee produces a mixed impact on the communities that grow it. Many studies are skeptical about fair trade, reporting that it often worsens the bargaining power of those who are not part of it. Coffee was incorporated into the fair-trade movement in 1988, when the Max Havelaar mark was introduced in the Netherlands. The very first fair-trade coffee was an effort to import a Guatemalan coffee into Europe as \"Indio Solidarity Coffee\".\n\nSince the founding of organizations such as the European Fair Trade Association (1987), the production and consumption of fair trade coffee has grown as some local and national coffee chains started to offer fair trade alternatives. For example, in April 2000, after a year-long campaign by the human rights organization Global Exchange, Starbucks decided to carry fair-trade coffee in its stores. Since September 2009 all Starbucks Espresso beverages in UK and Ireland are made with Fairtrade and Shared Planet certified coffee.\n\nA 2005 study done in Belgium concluded that consumers' buying behavior is not consistent with their positive attitude toward ethical products. On average 46% of European consumers claimed to be willing to pay substantially more for ethical products, including fair-trade products such as coffee. The study found that the majority of respondents were unwilling to pay the actual price premium of 27% for fair trade coffee.\n\nThe Oromo people would customarily plant a coffee tree on the graves of powerful sorcerers. They believed that the first coffee bush sprang up from the tears that the god of heaven shed over the corpse of a dead sorcerer.\n\nJohann Sebastian Bach was inspired to compose the humorous \"Coffee Cantata\", about dependence on the beverage.\n\nMarket volatility, and thus increased returns, during 1830 encouraged Brazilian entrepreneurs to shift their attention from gold to coffee, a crop hitherto reserved for local consumption. Concurrent with this shift was the commissioning of vital infrastructures, including approximately 7,000 km of railroads between 1860 and 1885. The creation of these railways enabled the importation of workers, in order to meet the enormous need for labor. This development primarily affected the State of Rio de Janeiro, as well as the Southern States of Brazil, most notably São Paulo, due to its favorable climate, soils, and terrain.\n\nCoffee production attracted immigrants in search of better economic opportunities in the early 1900s. Mainly, these were Portuguese, Italian, Spanish, German, and Japanese nationals. For instance, São Paulo received approximately 733,000 immigrants in the decade preceding 1900, whilst only receiving approximately 201,000 immigrants in the six years to 1890. The production yield of coffee increases. In 1880, São Paulo produced 1.2 million bags (25% of total production), in 1888 2.6 million (40%), in 1902 8 million bags (60%). Coffee is then 63% of the country's exports. The gains made by this trade allow sustained economic growth in the country.\n\nThe four years between planting a coffee and the first harvest extends seasonal variations in the price of coffee. The Brazilian Government is thus forced, to some extent, to keep strong price subsidies during production periods.\n\nCoffee competitions take place across the globe with people at the regional competing to achieve national titles and then compete on the international stage. World Coffee Events holds the largest of such events moving the location of the final competition each year. The competition includes the following events: Barista Championship, Brewers Cup, Latte Art and Cup Tasters.\nA World Brewer's Cup Championship takes place in Melbourne, Australia, every year that houses contestants from around the world to crown the World's Coffee King.\n\n\nOrganizations:\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "605299", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=605299", "title": "Karsk", "text": "Karsk\n\nKarsk (also called Kask) is a Norwegian cocktail from the Trøndelag region containing coffee together with moonshine and sometimes a spoon of sugar (enthusiasts often consider moonshine exclusively to be appropriate as an added component, as it has no inherent taste like other alcoholic beverages). Broader, it can also be found in other parts of Scandinavia.\n\nThe word \"Karsk\" is derived from the Old Norse adjective \"karskr\", meaning healthy, vigorous or agile.\n\nThe precise origin of Karsk is unknown, however it appears to have been a popular drink in the formerly Norwegian Bohuslän district in the early 1800s. By the latter half of the century its popularity spread across Norway. It was and still is especially popular in rural areas, although city-folk also enjoy it. It is firmly embedded as a part of the culture in Trøndelag, and according to former Norwegian Minister of Culture Trond Giske \"Everyone who has grown up in Trøndelag, has had Karsk at some point\".\n\nIn English speaking countries, the variant with vodka instead of moonshine is sometimes called Russian coffee, though Russian coffee can also refer to a variant served with whipped cream.\n\nIn Norway, the term karsk is predominantly used in the mid-region of the country (Trøndelag, roughly corresponding to the county of Trøndelag), while it may be referred to with other terms in other parts of the country. For instance, it may also be referred to as kaffedoktor (\"Coffee doctor\") or knikt (Hedmark dialect for knekt (jack/knave)); both these are for instance popular designations in the counties of Hedmark and Oppland. In Northern Norway it may also be referred to as rotar, though some would use these terms (kaffedoktor and rotar) exclusively about a variety where sugar is added with the coffee. \n\nIn Sweden it is called kask, kaffekask (\"strong coffee\") or kaffegök and is mainly drunk in the central and northern parts. Even the Southeastern dialect of Finnish has an expression for the beverage, there called kaffeplörö or kaffeblörö.\n\nIn Denmark this type of drink is usually called a kaffepunch and traditionally consists of nothing but coffee with schnapps. \n\nThe mixing ratio varies according to the strength of spirit that has been selected and the personal preferences of taste. If you use the \"96%\" moonshine, one usually tends to be more generous on the coffee than on booze. With normal 60% \"polsprit\" (legally bought spirits from Vinmonopolet) its custom to mix up to half and half. \n\nA traditional \"recipe\" is to put a coin in the bottom of the cup, pour the coffee until it is no longer visible, and mixing with alcohol until it reappears. The recipe is often claimed to be a hoax, as the coin will not reappear in a cylindrical coffee cup. This phenomenon is explained by the Beer–Lambert law stating that the absorption of light is proportional to the concentration. As such in order for the recipe to work one will need a cup with a significantly wider top than bottom which will allow for the concentration to decrease faster than the column of liquid increases.\n\nCoffee used in karsk is often weaker than regular coffee, and at rural celebrations in the Trøndelag region, it has been customary to serve half cups with \"thin coffee\", since it is expected that most people carry a flask of moonshine with them, to add to the cup.\n\nIf the Karsk becomes too strong, it is possible to decrease the alcohol content, inflame the surface of the alcohol-fume with a lighter or match. The hotter the coffee, the easier the alcohol will burn. Cold karsk will not ignite until the concentration exceeds 60-70%. The Karsk will also taste subjectively stronger the hotter it is. It is recommended to taste towards a desired concentration by increasing the amount of ethanol gradually, since the burning alcohol will be lost.\n"}
{"id": "606681", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=606681", "title": "Dasein", "text": "Dasein\n\nDasein () is a German word that means \"being there\" or \"presence\" (German: \"da\" \"there\"; \"sein\" \"being\"), and is often translated into English with the word \"existence\". It is a fundamental concept in the existential philosophy of Martin Heidegger, particularly in his \"magnum opus\" \"Being and Time\". Heidegger uses the expression \"Dasein\" to refer to the experience of being that is peculiar to human beings. Thus it is a form of being that is aware of and must confront such issues as personhood, mortality and the dilemma or paradox of living in relationship with other humans while being ultimately alone with oneself.\n\nIn German, \"Dasein\" is the vernacular term for \"existence\", as in \"I am pleased with my existence\" (\"Ich bin mit meinem Dasein zufrieden\"). The term has been used by several philosophers before Heidegger, most notably Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, with the meaning of human \"existence\" or \"presence\". It is derived from \"da-sein\", which literally means \"being-there/there-being\"—though Heidegger was adamant that this was an inappropriate translation of \"Dasein\".\nDasein for Heidegger can be a way of being involved with and caring for the immediate world in which one lives, while always remaining aware of the contingent element of that involvement, of the priority of the world to the self, and of the evolving nature of the self itself.\n\nThe opposite of this authentic self is everyday and inauthentic Dasein, the forfeiture of one's individual meaning, destiny and lifespan, in favour of an (escapist) immersion in the public everyday world—the anonymous, identical world of the They and the Them.\n\nIn harmony with Nietzsche's critique of the subject, as something definable in terms of consciousness, Heidegger distinguished Dasein from everyday consciousness in order to emphasize the critical importance \"Being\" has for our understanding and interpretation of the world, and so on.\n\"This entity which each of us is himself…we shall denote by the term “Dasein”\" (Heidegger, trans. 1927/1962, p.27).\n\n\"[Dasein is] that entity which in its Being has this very Being as an issue…\" (Heidegger, trans. 1927/1962, p.68).\nHeidegger sought to use the concept of \"Dasein\" to uncover the primal nature of \"Being\" (\"Sein\"), agreeing with Nietzsche and Dilthey that \"Dasein\" is always a being engaged in the world: neither a subject, nor the objective world alone, but the coherence of Being-in-the-world. This ontological basis of Heidegger's work thus opposes the Cartesian \"abstract agent\" in favour of practical engagement with one's environment. Dasein is revealed by projection into, and engagement with, a personal world—a never-ending process of involvement with the world as mediated through the projects of the self.\n\nHeidegger considered that language, everyday curiosity, logical systems, and common beliefs obscure \"Dasein's\" nature from itself. Authentic choice means turning away from the collective world of Them, to face \"Dasein\", one's individuality, one's own limited life-span, one's own being. Heidegger thus intended the concept of \"Dasein\" to provide a stepping stone in the questioning of what it means to \"be\"—to have one's own being, one's own death, one's own truth.\n\nHeidegger also saw the question of \"Dasein\" as extending beyond the realms disclosed by positive science or in the history of metaphysics. “Scientific research is not the only manner of Being which this entity can have, nor is it the one which lies closest. Moreover, Dasein itself has a special distinctiveness as compared with other entities; [...] it is ontically distinguished by the fact that, in its very Being, that Being is an issue for it.” \"Being and Time\" stressed the ontological difference between entities and the being \"of\" entities: “Being is always the Being of an entity.” Establishing this difference is the general motif running through \"Being and Time\".\n\nSome scholars disagree with this interpretation, however, arguing that for Heidegger \"\"Dasein\"\" denoted a structured awareness or an institutional \"way of life\". Others suggest that Heidegger's early insistence on the ontological priority of Dasein was muted in his post-war writings.\n\nSome have argued for an origin of \"Dasein\" in Chinese philosophy and Japanese philosophy: according to Tomonobu Imamichi, Heidegger's concept of \"Dasein\" was inspired—although Heidegger remained silent on this—by Okakura Kakuzo's concept of \"das-in-der-Welt-sein\" (being-in-the-worldness, worldliness) expressed in \"The Book of Tea\" to describe Zhuangzi's Taoist philosophy, which Imamichi's teacher had offered to Heidegger in 1919, after having followed lessons with him the year before.\n\nFor Karl Jaspers, the term \"\"Dasein\"\" meant existence in its most minimal sense, the realm of objectivity and science, in opposition to what Jaspers called \"\"Existenz\"\", the realm of authentic being. Due to the drastically different use of the term \"\"Dasein\"\" between the two philosophers, there is often some confusion in students who begin with either Heidegger or Jaspers and subsequently study the other.\n\nIn \"Philosophy\" (3 vols, 1932), Jaspers gave his view of the history of philosophy and introduced his major themes. Beginning with modern science and empiricism, Jaspers points out that as we question reality, we confront borders that an empirical (or scientific) method can simply not transcend. At this point, the individual faces a choice: sink into despair and resignation, or take a leap of faith toward what Jaspers calls \"Transcendence\". In making this leap, individuals confront their own limitless freedom, which Jaspers calls \"Existenz\", and can finally experience authentic existence.\n\nEero Tarasti considered \"Dasein\" very important in \"Existential Semiotics\".\n\nJacques Lacan turned in the 1950s to Heidegger's Dasein for his characterisation of the psychoanalyst as being-for-death: (\"être-pour-la-mort\"). Similarly, he saw the analysand as searching for authentic speech, as opposed to “the subject who loses his meaning in the objectifications of discourse...[which] will give him the wherewithal to forget his own existence and his own death”.\n\nAlfred Schutz distinguished between direct and indirect social experience, emphasising that in the latter “My orientation is not towards the existence (\"Dasein\") of a concrete individual Thou. It is not towards any subjective experiences now being constituted in all their uniqueness in another's mind”,\n\nTheodor W. Adorno criticised Heidegger's concept of Dasein as an idealistic retreat from historical reality.\n\nRichard Rorty considered that with Dasein, Heidegger was creating a conservative myth of being, complicit with the Romantic elements of National Socialism.\n\n"}
{"id": "607494", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=607494", "title": "Granita", "text": "Granita\n\nGranita (; in Italian also granita siciliana ) is a semi-frozen dessert made from sugar, water and various flavorings. Originally from Sicily, it is available throughout Italy in varying forms. It is related to sorbet and Italian ice; however, in most of Sicily, it has a coarser, more crystalline texture. Food writer Jeffrey Steingarten says that \"the desired texture seems to vary from city to city\" on the island; on the west coast and in Palermo, it is at its chunkiest, and in the east it is nearly as smooth as sorbet. This is largely the result of different freezing techniques: the smoother types are produced in a gelato machine, while the coarser varieties are frozen with only occasional agitation, then scraped or shaved to produce separated crystals. Although its texture varies from coarse to smooth, it is always different from that of ice cream, which is creamier, and from that of sorbet, which is more compact; this makes granita distinct and unique.\n\nCommon and traditional flavoring ingredients include lemon juice, mandarin oranges, jasmine, coffee, almonds, mint, and when in season wild strawberries and black mulberries. Chocolate granitas have a tradition in the city of Catania but are also available in other parts of Sicily. The nuances of the Sicilian ingredients are important to the flavor of the finished granita: Sicilian lemons are a less acidic, more floral variety similar to Meyer lemons, while the almonds used contain some number of bitter almonds, crucial to the signature almond flavor. Another popular flavor used in granita is pistachio, also an agricultural product of Sicily.\n\nGranita with coffee is very common in the city of Messina, while granita with almonds is popular in the city of Catania. Granita in combination with a yeast pastry called \"brioche\" is a common breakfast in summer time (the Sicilian brioche is generally flatter and wider than the French version).\n\nGranita is often found served as a slush-type drink rather than a dessert, in a paper or plastic cup with a plastic lid and a straw (often a spoon straw).\n\nGranita, made with savory ingredients or less sugar than the dessert, is often served between courses of a meal as a palate cleanser.\n\n"}
{"id": "607794", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=607794", "title": "Kit Kat", "text": "Kit Kat\n\nKit Kat is a chocolate-covered wafer bar confection created by Rowntree's of York, United Kingdom, and is now produced globally by Nestlé, which acquired Rowntree in 1988, and closed it in 2006, with the exception of the United States where it is made under license by H.B. Reese Candy Company, a division of The Hershey Company. The standard bars consist of two or four pieces composed of three layers of wafer, separated and covered by an outer layer of chocolate. Each finger can be snapped from the bar separately. There are many different flavours of Kit Kat, including milk, white, and dark chocolate.\n\nUse of the name Kit Kat or Kit Cat for a type of food goes back to the 18th century, when mutton pies known as a Kit-Kat were served at meetings of the political Kit-Cat Club in London owned by pastry chef Christopher Catling.\n\nThe origins of what is now known as the Kit Kat brand go back to 1911, when Rowntree's, a confectionery company based in York in the United Kingdom, trademarked the terms Kit Cat and Kit Kat. The names were not used immediately and Kit Kat first appeared in the 1920s, when Rowntree's launched a brand of boxed chocolates entitled Kit Cat. This continued into the 1930s, when Rowntree's shifted focus and production onto its Black Magic and Dairy Box brands. With the promotion of alternative products the Kit Cat brand decreased and was eventually discontinued. The original four-finger bar was developed after a worker at Rowntree's York Factory put a suggestion in a recommendation box for a snack that \"a man could take to work in his pack\". The bar launched on 29 August 1935, under the title of Rowntree's Chocolate Crisp (priced at 2d), and was sold in London and throughout southern England.\n\nRowntree's Chocolate Crisp was renamed Kit Kat Chocolate Crisp in 1937, the same year that Kit Kat began to incorporate \"Break\" into its recognisable advertising strategy. The colour scheme and first flavour variation to the brand came in 1942, owing to World War II, when food shortages prompted an alteration in the recipe. The flavour of Kit Kat was changed to dark chocolate; the packaging abandoned its Chocolate Crisp title, and was coloured blue. After the war the name became Kit Kat, with the original milk chocolate recipe and red packaging.\n\nFollowing its success in the United Kingdom, in the 1940s Kit Kat was exported to Canada, South Africa, Ireland, Australia, and New Zealand. In 1958, Donald Gilles, the executive at JWT Orland, created the iconic advertising line \"Have a Break, Have a Kit Kat\". The brand further expanded in the 1970s when Rowntree created a new distribution factory in Germany to meet European demand, and established agreements to distribute the brand in the US through the Hershey company, and in Japan through Fujiya.\n\nIn June 1988, Swiss company Nestlé acquired Kit Kat through the purchase of Rowntree's, giving Nestlé global control over the brand, except in the US, and production and distribution increased with new facilities in Japan and additional manufacturing operations set up in Malaysia, India and China.\n\nThe Hershey Company has a licence to produce Kit Kat bars in the United States which dates from 1970, when Hershey executed a licensing agreement with Rowntree which allowed Hershey to retain the Kit Kat licence so long as Hershey was not sold. Nestlé, which has a substantial presence in the US, had to honour the licensing agreement when it bought Rowntree in 1988. As Kit Kat is one of Hershey's top five brands in the US market, the Kit Kat licence was a key factor in Hershey's failed attempt to attract a serious buyer in 2002.\n\nVariants in the traditional chocolate bar first appeared in 1996 when Kit Kat Orange, the first flavour variant, was introduced in the United Kingdom. Its success was followed by several varieties including mint and caramel, and in 1999 Kit Kat Chunky was launched and received favourably by international consumers. Variations on the traditional Kit Kat have continued to be developed since then. In 2000 Nestlé acquired Fujiya's share of the brand in Japan, and also expanded its marketplace in Japan, Russia, Turkey, and Venezuela, in addition to markets in Eastern and Central Europe. Throughout the decade Kit Kat introduced dozens of flavours and line extensions within specific consumer markets. It celebrated its 75th anniversary on 10 October 2009.\n\nThe traditional bar has four fingers which each measure approximately by . A two-finger bar was launched in the 1930s, and has remained the company's best-selling biscuit brand ever since. The 1999 Kit Kat Chunky (known as Big Kat and Kit Kat Extra Crispy in the US) has one large finger approximately wide. Kit Kat bars contain varying numbers of fingers depending on the market, ranging from the half-finger sized Kit Kat Petit in Japan, to the three-fingered variants in Arabia, and the twelve-finger family-size bars in Australia and France. Kit Kat bars are sold individually and in bags, boxes and multi-packs. In Ireland, France, the UK and America Nestlé also produces a Kit Kat ice cream, and in Australia and Malaysia, Kit Kat Drumsticks.\n\nIn 2010, a new £5 million manufacturing line was opened by Nestlé in York, to produce more than a billion Kit Kat bars each year.\n\nKit Kat bars are produced in 16 countries by Nestlé: Brazil, Mexico, United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, Germany, Russia, Japan, China, Malaysia, Thailand, India, Turkey, United Arab Emirates, Bulgaria and Algeria. Kit Kat bars in the United States are produced under licence by The Hershey Company, a Nestlé competitor, due to a prior licensing agreement with Rowntree.\nThe year 2003 was a turning point for the Kit Kat bar as well as the confectionery industry in general. The popularity of low carb diets, and the push to healthier eating stifled sales growth in many parts of the world. In addition, fierce competition from Cadbury's newly formed Dairy Milk superbrand also contributed to Kit Kat sales decreasing considerably in its home market of the UK, and threatened to depose it from its No.1 position. The solution adopted by Nestlé and others was to increase dramatically the number of new and unique variations of their confections and market them as limited or special editions, usually only available for a few months at a time so as not lose sales of their standard products. The strategy initially reversed the decline of the Kit Kat and has been adopted worldwide by Nestlé, Hershey, Mars, and others with similar success.\n\nThis has resulted in many new flavours and varieties of the Kit Kat and other confections appearing globally since then. While some flavours succeeded, many failed, alienating some consumers in the process, causing Nestlé to scale back on new releases.\n\nIn September 2006, Nestlé announced that they would be cutting 645 jobs in their York factory and moving all Smarties production to their Hamburg factory, which had already been producing two-thirds. They stated that this move would allow for a £20 million investment to modernise the antiquated York factory and improve Kit Kat production.\n\nAs dark chocolate has seen increased demand and favour worldwide because of its purported health benefits, in September 2006 the four-finger Kit Kat Fine Dark was launched in the United Kingdom as a permanent product, and packaging for the entire brand was changed. Hershey had sold the four-finger Kit Kat Dark in the US several years previously as a limited edition, and began doing so again.\n\nNestlé now manufactures two-finger Kit Kats with natural flavourings, and for the first time, Kit Kats in this format are suitable for vegans. It is not known at this date whether or not other varieties will follow suit. In 2014, Kit Kat was ranked the third best selling chocolate bar in the United Kingdom, after Dairy Milk and Galaxy.\n\nWhen first introduced, the original Rowntree's Chocolate Crisp bar had a red wrapper, which briefly became blue between 1945–1947. As a result of milk shortages after the end of World War II, dark chocolate was used instead of milk chocolate during that period.\n\nSince its introduction in the 1970s, the Hershey's Kit Kat packaging and advertising in the United States differed from the branding used in every other country where it was sold. In 2002, Hershey Kit Kats adopted the slanted ellipse logo used worldwide by Nestlé, though the ellipse was red and the text white. The US version of \"Kit Kat Chunky\" is known as \"Big Kat\".\n\nIn the United Kingdom, the product was traditionally wrapped in silver foil and an outer paper band. In 2001 this was changed to flow wrap plastic. Foil and paper wrapping is still used for Kit-Kats sold as part of a multipack.\n\nAfter launching in the 1930s, Rowntree's Chocolate Crisp was originally advertised as \"the biggest little meal\" and \"the best companion to a cup of tea\". During World War II, Kit Kat was depicted as a valuable wartime foodstuff, with the slogan \"what active people need\". 'Kitty the Kat' arrived in the late 1940s to emphasise the \"rich full cream milk\" qualities of the bar and, thanks to contemporary improvements in production methods, also highlighted the new and improved 'snap' by responding to a biscuit being broken off screen. The first Kit Kat poster appeared in 1951, and the first colour TV advertisement appeared in 1969.\n\nSince 1958, the slogan for the Kit Kat in the UK and elsewhere has been \"Have a break... have a Kit Kat\". However, in 1995, Nestlé sought to trademark the \"Have a break\" portion. After a ten-year legal battle, which was contested by rival Mars, the European Court of Justice ruled on 7 July 2005 to send the case back to the British courts. In 2004, Nestlé UK used the slogan \"Make the most of your break\", but later returned to the original slogan.\n\nThe United States also used the short-lived slogan, \"Tastes So Good, You'll Roar\", in the early 1980s. The TV commercial most known from this slogan involves a young man biting into one of the Kit Kat bars in a grocery store, and roaring like a lion so loudly the whole store shakes violently, knocking items from the shelves. Another short-lived US slogan was \"That's What You Want\", whose television adverts showed people pulling unlikely foodstuffs from their pockets or purses, before rejecting them in favour of a Kit Kat.\n\nThe \"classic\" American version of the \"Gimme a Break\" Kit Kat jingle (in use in the US since 1986) was written by Ken Shuldman (copy) and Michael A. Levine (music) for the DDB Advertising Agency. Versions of the original have been covered by Carrie Underwood, Shawn Colvin, and many studio singers, as well as people who have appeared on-camera in the commercials. The jingle was cited in a study by University of Cincinnati researcher James J. Kellaris as one of the top ten \"earworms\" – bits of melody that become stuck in your head. Another version of the advertising jingle 'Gimme a break' created for Kit Kat \"Factory\" commercial in the US was an original recording by Andrew W.K. W.K. was hired to write a new musical version for their \"Gimme a break\" slogan. Variations on the Andrew W.K. advertisement included executive dance routines in corporate offices and a network newsroom. However, the \"classic\" song has also been used again since the newer version first aired in 2004.\n\nMany adverts were worldwide hits among them in 1980's with Ken Campbell in a advert with Heaven and Hell with Devil and Angel on Television.\n\nA 1989 United Kingdom advertisement for Kit Kat, in which a zoo photographer \"takes a break\" from waiting for pandas to appear in an enclosure and misses them performing a dance routine, came in 30th in Channel 4's \"100 Greatest Adverts\" poll in 2000.\n\nThe Maltese tour boat MV \"Lady Davinia\" had a distinctive red and white Kit Kat paint scheme before she sank in 2008.\n\nIn late 2004 through to the end of 2006, Nestlé Rowntree sponsored the English football club York City F.C.. As a result, the club's home-ground, Bootham Crescent, was renamed to KitKat Crescent.\n\nIn a 2012 advertising campaign in the UK and Ireland, several new flavours of Chunky Kit Kat were marketed, with consumers being asked to vote for their favourite. Selecting from white chocolate, double chocolate, peanut butter, and orange, Peanut butter was the winner by having 47% of votes. A similar campaign occurred in 2013 with mint, coconut, hazelnut and chocolate fudge.\n\nIn September 2013, it was announced that version 4.4 of Google's Android mobile operating system would be named \"KitKat\". Google licensed the name from Nestlé, with no money changing hands. A promotion ran in numerous countries with specially branded Android Kit Kat bars to win Nexus 7 devices and Google Play Store credit.\n\nIn December 2009, it was announced that the four-finger variety of Kit Kat would use Fairtrade chocolate (at least in Britain and Ireland) from January 2010. The Fairtrade Kit Kat promotion was extended to the finger edition in January 2010.\n\nDuring the first three weeks of \"Big Brother Series 7\", Channel 4 conducted a promotion in conjunction with Nestlé to distribute 100 \"golden tickets\" randomly throughout Kit Kats, in a style reminiscent of the story \"Charlie and the Chocolate Factory\". Members of the public finding these tickets were permitted to use them to give themselves a chance to become a \"Big Brother\" housemate and bypass the standard auditions process.\n\nGolden ticket holders were invited to a television show where one of them, Susie Verrico, was chosen to enter the House by Aisleyne Horgan-Wallace, picking a ball out of a machine at random.\n\nThis contest caused some controversy, with the Advertising Standards Authority saying that the terms and conditions of the draw should have been made clearer in related advertisements, and that an independent adjudicator should have been present before and during the draw.\n\nMany varieties of Kit Kat have existed, either permanently or as limited editions, such as those sold to commemorate festivals such as St. Valentine's Day. In Japan, Nestlé has introduced over 200 different flavours since 2000, including ginger ale, soy sauce, creme brulee, green tea, sake, and banana. The flavours are designed to appeal to younger buyers, and are often bought as good-luck gifts as the brand name echoes the Japanese phrase \"Kitto Katsu\", roughly translating as \"surely win.\"\n\nThe Kit Kat Orange was the first flavour variant to be introduced in the United Kingdom, in 1996 and 1998 in Ireland. It was followed in 1997 by the Kit Kat Dark and Kit Kat Mint. All three were available as permanent editions of the two-finger multipack in the United Kingdom, along with the Kit Kat Original, the Kit Kat White, and from 2012 the Kit Kat Cookies & Cream.\n\nA wide variety of promotional items exist, ranging from traditional merchandise (such as mugs, pens, oven gloves and tea-towels) to less common items such as coats for small dogs. Recently in Japan, Kit Kats have come packaged with CD singles, and a special limited edition double pack of Kit Kat Crispy Monogatari came bundled with a mini book featuring six short stories, one of which was written by Koji Suzuki, author of the Ring cycle series. In Japan, Kit Kats are also available in jars that are dispensed from vending machines.\n\nThe 'standard' Kit Kat finger bars can come in a variety of presentations and nutritional values. The bars can come in a miniature form of two finger mini bars, or a larger standard four, or in some cases, three, fingered bars.\n\nThe standard size has been upgraded in several cases up to a 'monster Size' bar, which can include up to five or eight fingers. Large single-fingered \"Chunky Kit Kats\" were launched in the United Kingdom in 1998 and have been sold in a variety of flavours. The market for Chunky Kit Kats has also expanded to Canada.\n\nOther forms and shapes include \"Choc'n'Go\" individually wrapped fingers in France, a twelve-finger \"Family Block\" available in New Zealand and Australia, round bite-sized \"Pop Choc\" pieces, square \"Kubes\", praline-filled \"Senses\", a yoghurt with Kit Kat pieces, and a Kit Kat ice cream cone.\n\nIn the 1980s, a Kit Kat with five shorter fingers was sold in vending machines in the UK.\n\nThe Japanese \"Bake 'N Tasty Mini Kit Kats Custard Pudding Flavour\" was launched in 2014. The bar must be baked in an oven before consumption, and the surface sugar caramelises in the process.\n\nIn 2015, a new luxury and giftable variant of Kit Kat called Kit Kat Rubies was launched in Malaysia. Comes with the box of 20 small bars, the Kit Kat Rubies bar made with the premium chocolate truffle cream and imported roasted hazelnut pieces.\n\nAs of 2017, U.S. variants include the standard and king-size four-finger bars, standard bars covered with white or dark chocolate, snack-size orange-covered bars for Halloween, bagged wrapped one-finger miniatures (original and assorted), unwrapped minis, a redesigned Big Kat, and a king-size Big Kat (two of the new Big Kat bars).\n\nKit Kat has opened a Chocolatory in the Melbourne Central Shopping Centre in Melbourne, Australia. The shop allows customers to use touch screens to create their own Kit Kat from a selection of chocolates and ingredients; they are made while the customers wait.\n\nIn March 2010, Kit Kat was targeted for a boycott by Greenpeace for using palm oil, which the environmental organisation claimed resulted in destruction of forest habitats for orangutans in Indonesia. A YouTube video by Greenpeace went viral and Nestlé announced a partnership with The Forest Trust to establish \"responsible sourcing guidelines\" and ensure that its products did not have a deforestation footprint. They aimed to achieve a fully sustainable method of palm oil harvesting by 2015. Nestlé state that 58% of palm oil purchased in 2017 was responsibly sourced.\n\nKit Kat Milk Chocolate is made for the North American market with the ingredient PGPR (polyglycerol polyricinoleate, E476, AKA Palsgaard PGPR 4150), which is used to reduce the amount of cocoa butter needed and as an emulsifier. The FDA has determined it to be safe for humans in amounts up to 7.5 milligrams per kilogram of body weight. \"Liver and kidney enlargement was noticed at much higher doses.\"\n\nOriginal Kit Kat ingredients unless otherwise stated, listed by decreasing weight: milk chocolate (sugar, milk ingredients, cocoa butter, cocoa mass, whey powder, lactose, soya lecithin, polyglycerol polyricinoleate, natural flavour), wheat flour, sugar, modified palm oil, cocoa, sodium bicarbonate, soya lecithin, yeast, and natural flavour.\n\nMilk chocolate (66%) (sugar, cocoa butter, cocoa mass, dried whole milk, cocoa mass, lactose and proteins from whey, whey powder, emulsifier (sunflower lecithin), butterfat, flavouring), wheat flour, sugar, vegetable fat, cocoa mass, yeast, raising agent (sodium bicarbonate), salt, emulsifier (soya lecithin), flavourings.\n\nIn 2006, the UK four-finger Kit Kat contained 233 dietary calories (kcal) (975 kilojoules). In 2009, the two-finger Kit Kat contained 107 calories.\n\nIn 2013, the UK Kit Kat Chunky contained 247 calories which reduced to 207 calories in 2015. This correlated to a reduction in weight by 19% from 48 g to 40 g.\n\nHershey's Kit Kat Crisp Wafers in Chocolate contain sugar, wheat flour, cocoa butter, nonfat milk, chocolate, refined palm kernel oil, lactose (milk), milk fat, contains 2% or less of: soy lecithin, PGPR (emulsifier), yeast, artificial flavor, salt, and sodium bicarbonate.\n\nMilk chocolate (sugar, modified milk ingredients, cocoa butter, cocoa mass, whey powder, lactose, soya lecithin, polyglycerol polyricinoleate, natural flavour), wheat flour, sugar, modified palm oil, cocoa, sodium bicarbonate, soya lecithin, yeast, Natural Flavour. Dark chocolate (sugar, unsweetened chocolate, cocoa butter, milk ingredients, soya lecithin, salt, artificial flavour), wheat flour, sugar, modified palm oil, unsweetened chocolate or cocoa powder, sodium bicarbonate, soya lecithin, artificial flavour. May contain salt and/or yeast.\n\nIn Japan, Kit Kats are produced at Nestlé-owned factories in Himeji and Kasumigaura. The milk chocolate used for Kit Kats is made from whole-milk powder and Nestlé buys most of its cacao beans from West Africa.\n\nNestlé has factories in various locations in China, to supply to China and Hong Kong. During the 2008 Chinese milk scandal, where melamine was found to have tainted some milk suppliers in China, importers in Hong Kong chose to import bars manufactured in the United Kingdom.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "608980", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=608980", "title": "Butter chicken", "text": "Butter chicken\n\nButter chicken or murgh makhani (Hindi: मुर्ग़ मक्खनी) () is a dish, originating in India, of chicken in a mildly spiced tomato sauce.\n\nThe dish has its roots in Moti Mahal Daryaganj. It was developed by three Indians, Kundan Lal Jaggi, Kundan Lal Gujral and Thakur Dass all Punjabi Hindu restaurateurs who were the founders of Moti Mahal restaurant in Delhi, India. \n\nThe dish was created by the three partners at their restaurant in Delhi in the 1950s. The dish was made \"By Chance\" by mixing the leftover chicken in a tomato gravy, rich in butter and cream.\n\nIn Australia and New Zealand, it is also a pie filling.\n\nChicken is marinated for several hours in a lemon juice, dahi (yogurt) and a mixture of Kashmiri red chilli, salt, garam masala and ginger garlic paste.\n\nThe chicken is usually cooked in a tandoor (traditional clay oven), but maybe grilled, roasted, or pan-fried. It is served in a mild curry sauce that includes butter. The sauce is a tomato and onion based sauce that is simmered until smooth and much of the water has evaporated. There are many variations on the composition and spicing of the sauce, which is sieved so that it is finally a velvety smooth. Spices may include cardamom, cumin, cloves, cinnamon, coriander, pepper, garam masala and fenugreek (Punjabi/Hindi: kasuri methi). Cream may be used in the sauce or as a garnish. Cashew paste may be used as a thickener and is finally garnished with cilantro.\n\n"}
{"id": "609371", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=609371", "title": "English muffin", "text": "English muffin\n\nEnglish muffins are a small, round, flat yeast-leavened bread which is commonly sliced horizontally, toasted, and buttered. Toasted English muffins, which are often used in the United States as a breakfast food, may be served with sweet toppings (e.g., fruit jam, or honey) or savory toppings (e.g., eggs, sausage rounds, bacon, or cheese). English muffins are also used as the bread in a variety of breakfast sandwiches, and are an essential ingredient in Eggs Benedict and most of its variations.\n\nIn the United States and U.S.-influenced territories, they are called \"English muffins\" to distinguish them from U.S. muffins, which are larger and sweeter miniature baked quick breads. They are very similar to bolo do caco in Portuguese cuisine.\n\nThe word \"muffin\" is thought to be Low German \"muffen\" meaning \"little cakes\". In the past, muffins were sold door to door by hawkers in England as a snack bread before most houses were provided with ovens in the early nineteenth century, giving rise to the traditional English nursery rhyme \"The Muffin Man\", which dates from 1820 at the latest.\n\nReferences to English muffins appear in U.S. newspapers starting in 1859, and detailed descriptions of them and recipes were published as early as 1870.\n\nSamuel Bath Thomas emigrated from Plymouth, England, to New York City in 1874. By 1880 he had opened his own bakery at 163 Ninth Avenue. Using his mother's recipe, he began making 'English' muffins at his Ninth Avenue bakery in 1880, selling them from the bakery to hotels and grocery stores. They were soft and spongy after baking like traditional muffins, but were also pre-cut, which was later called \"fork-split\", so as to be able to be pulled apart, giving a rougher toasting surface than would be obtained by slicing. Later they were baked in ovens. They became popular as an alternative to toast; Thomas opened a second bakery around the corner from the first at 337 West 20th Street in a building that remains known as \"The Muffin House\".The Merriam-Webster dictionary gives the origin of the term \"English Muffin\" as 1902. In a trademark filing in 1926, it was stated that the Thomas' name of the product was first used in 1894.\n\nThomas' is a brand of English muffins and bagels in North America, founded by Samuel Bath Thomas. Today the company is owned by Bimbo Bakeries USA, which also owns the Entenmann's, Boboli, Stroehmann, and Arnold bakeries.\n\nFoster's sourdough English muffins were a popular brand English muffin originally from San Francisco. They were a signature menu item at Foster's restaurants from the 1940s to the 1970s, and continued to be produced as a packaged brand until 2008.\n\nEnglish muffins can be purchased in a wide range of varieties, including whole wheat, multigrain, cinnamon raisin, cranberry, and apple cinnamon.\n\nEnglish muffins are sold in all British supermarkets and many bakeries and are referred to as simply \"muffins\". U.S.-style muffins may be referred to as \"American muffins\", \"American-style muffins\" or \"sweet muffins\" for clarity or branding purposes, but most people have no problems distinguishing one from the other and use the same word for both.\n\nEnglish muffins are also available in most major supermarkets across Germany under the name \"Toastbrötchen\" which translates as \"toast bun\".\n\n"}
{"id": "610849", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=610849", "title": "Focaccia", "text": "Focaccia\n\nFocaccia (; ) is a flat oven-baked Italian bread product similar in style and texture to pizza dough. Focaccia can be used as a side to many meals or as sandwich bread. \"Focaccia al rosmarino\" (focaccia with rosemary) is a common focaccia style in Italian cuisine that may be served as an antipasto, appetizer, table bread, or snack.\n\nFocaccia is similar to the Greek flatbread lagana.\n\nIn Ancient Rome, \"panis focacius\" was a flat bread baked on the hearth. The word is derived from the Latin \"focus\" meaning \"hearth, place for baking.\" The basic recipe is thought by some to have originated with the Etruscans, but today it is widely associated with Ligurian cuisine.\n\nAs the tradition spread, the different dialects and diverse local ingredients resulted in a large variety of bread (some may even be considered cake). Due to the number of small towns and hamlets dotting the coast of Liguria, the focaccia recipe has fragmented into countless variations (from the biscuit-hard \"focaccia di Camogli\" to the oily softness of the one made in Voltri), with some bearing little resemblance to its original form. The most extreme example is a specialty called \"focaccia col formaggio\" (\"focaccia with cheese\") which is made in Recco, near Genoa. Other than the name, this Recco version bears no resemblance to other focaccia varieties, having a stracchino cheese filling sandwiched between two layers of paper-thin dough.\n\nOut of Liguria, focaccia comes in many regional variations and its recipe, its texture, its flavor remarkably varies from north to south of Italy. In some parts of the Northwest, for example, a popular recipe is \"focaccia dolce\" (\"sweet focaccia\"), consisting of a basic focaccia base and sprinkled lightly with sugar, or including raisins, honey, or other sweet ingredients. Another sweet focaccia from the Northeast is \"focaccia veneta\" (\"Venetian focaccia\"), a typical cake of the Venetian Easter tradition: it is based on eggs, sugar and butter (instead of olive oil and salt) and it looks quite similar to panettone or to another Venetian cake like pandoro.\n\nIn South Tyrol and in the small village of Krimml in Austria, the so-called \"Osterfochaz\" (in Krimml \"Fochiz\") is the traditional Easter gift of the Godparents to their Godchildren. Therefore, the bread is slightly thinner in the middle, in order to put in the coloured Easter eggs.\n\nFocaccia al rosmarino (focaccia with rosemary) is a common flatbread style in Italian cuisine that may be served as an antipasto, appetizer, table bread, or snack. Similar dishes include focaccia alla salvia, pizza bianca and potato rosemary focaccia, the latter of which is referred to as \"potato pizza\" in New York City. Like other focaccie, focaccia al rosmarino is sometimes considered to be a kind of pizza, though they are generally distinguished in Italy.\n\nFocaccia al rosmarino is a popular style of flatbread in Italian cuisine prepared using focaccia dough, rosemary, olive oil and salt, sea salt or kosher salt. Focaccia al rosmarino may be served as antipasto (appetizer), table bread or snack. Whole or sliced fresh rosemary leaves may be used, as can dried rosemary. It may be garnished with sprigs of fresh rosemary after baking and sprinkled with salt.\n\nFocaccia al rosmarino may have a moist texture, and the ingredients used in its preparation and the shape it is formed in varies in different regions. It may be prepared as a savory or sweet dish. The dish is typically baked, although it is sometimes fried in oil. Rosemary is among the most common herbs used to flavor focaccia bread. Additional ingredients such as garlic, or basil may be used. It is sometimes served accompanied with slices of prosciutto, an Italian dry-cured ham. It can be prepared as a gluten-free dish and as a vegan dish. It may be used in the preparation of sandwiches.\n\nA very similar style is focaccia alla salvia (focaccia with sage), which is prepared by simply substituting sage for the rosemary. Pizza bianca is another similar style, which is prepared using pizza dough, olive oil, chopped rosemary and salt. The term \"pizza bianca\" refers to focaccia in some areas of Italy.\n\nPotato rosemary focaccia (\"focaccia con patate e rosmarino\" in Tuscany) is a variation that is referred to as \"potato pizza\" in New York City. Pizza is also a similar dish.\n\n"}
{"id": "611752", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=611752", "title": "Ravioli", "text": "Ravioli\n\nRavioli (; singular: \"raviolo\") are a type of dumpling comprising a filling enveloped in thin pasta dough. Usually served in broth or with a sauce, they originated as a traditional food in Italian cuisine. Ravioli are commonly square, though other forms are also used, including circular and semi-circular (mezzelune).\n\nThe earliest known mention of ravioli appears in the personal letters of Francesco di Marco Datini, a merchant of Prato in the 14th century. In Venice, the mid-14th-century manuscript \"Libro per cuoco\" offers ravioli of green herbs blanched and minced, mixed with beaten egg and fresh cheese, simmered in broth and seasoned with \"sweet and strong spices\". In Rome, ravioli were already well-known when Bartolomeo Scappi served them with boiled chicken to the papal conclave of 1549.\n\nRavioli were already known in 14th century England, appearing in the Anglo-Norman vellum manuscript Forme of Cury under the name of \"rauioles\". \nSicilian ravioli and Malta's \"ravjul\" may thus be older than North Italian ones. Maltese \"ravjul\" are stuffed with \"irkotta\", the locally produced sheep's-milk ricotta, or with \"gbejna\", the traditional fresh sheep's-milk cheese.\n\nTraditionally, ravioli are made at home. The filling varies according to the area where they are prepared. In Rome and Latium the filling is made with ricotta cheese, spinach, nutmeg and black pepper. In Sardinia, ravioli are filled with ricotta and grated lemon rind.\n\nModern ravioli is also mass-produced by machine.\n\nIn Europe and the United States, fresh-packed ravioli have several weeks of shelf life. Canned ravioli was pioneered by the Italian Army in the First World War and was popularized by Heinz and Buitoni in the UK and Europe, and Chef Boyardee in the United States. Canned ravioli may be filled with beef, processed cheese, chicken, or Italian sausage and served in a tomato, tomato-meat, or tomato-cheese sauce. Toasted ravioli (ravioli that have been breaded and deep fried) was developed in St. Louis, Missouri, and is a popular appetizer and snack food.\n\nRavioli are commonly encountered in the cooking of Nice, the broader Côte d'Azur, and the surrounding regions in the south of France. The contents of these vary greatly, but most idiosyncratic to the region is the use of leftover daube meat. Miniaturized cheese-filled ravioli, locally called \"ravioles\", are a specialty of the Drôme department in the Rhône-Alpes region, particularly the commune of Romans-sur-Isère, and are frequently served \"au gratin\".\n\nIn Turkey, Mantı which is similar to ravioli is a popular dish. It is stuffed with spiced meat and served with paprika sauce and yoghurt. Similar dishes in China are the jiaozi or wonton.\n\nIn India, a popular dish called gujiya is similar to ravioli. However, it is prepared sweet, with a filling of dry fruits, sugar, and a mixture of sweet spices, then deep fried in vegetable oil. Different stuffings are used in different parts of India. The dish is a popular food prepared during festivals all over the country.\n\nJewish cuisine has a similar dish called kreplach, a pocket of meat or other filling, with an egg pasta based covering. It is simmered in chicken soup. In that method of preparation it appears to be the direct descendent or inspiration of the original dish, which was simmered in \"broth\". Claudia Roden argues it originated in the Venetian Ghetto at about the same time ravioli was developed, and in time became a mainstay of Jewish cuisine.\n\nA similar Middle Eastern dish called shishbarak contains pasta filled with minced beef meat and cooked in hot yogurt.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "614586", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=614586", "title": "Fudge", "text": "Fudge\n\nFudge is a type of sugar candy that is made by mixing sugar, butter and milk, heating it to the soft-ball stage at , and then beating the mixture while it cools so that it acquires a smooth, creamy consistency. Fruits, nuts, chocolate, caramel, candies, sweets and other flavors are sometimes added either inside or on top. A recent trend has been to create novel flavors of fudge, giving vibrant visual appeal at the same time. \n\nFudge is often bought as a gift from a gift shop in tourist areas and attractions.\n\nIn a letter written in 1921 by Emelyn Battersby Hartridge, she recounts the purchasing of a box of fudge for 40 cents a pound in 1886 in Baltimore, Maryland. A student at Vassar College in Poughkeepsie, New York, she claimed to have introduced it there in 1888 by selling her own batch. The diary of another student mentions making \"fudges\" in 1892. An 1893 letter from another Vassar College student describes \"fudges\" as containing sugar, chocolate, milk and butter. A recipe for \"Fudges at Vassar\" was printed in \"The Sun\" in 1895. Despite describing the confections as \"Vassar chocolates\", the recipe given comprises sugar, milk, butter and vanilla extract.\n\nWord of this popular confectionery spread to other women's colleges. For example, Wellesley College and Smith College have their own versions of a fudge recipe dating from the late 19th or early 20th century.\n\nFudge-making evolved a variety of flavors and additives as it grew beyond its popularity at colleges.\n\nIn forming a fondant, it is not easy to keep all vibrations and seed crystals from causing rapid crystallization into large crystals. Consequently, milkfat and corn syrup are often added. Corn syrup contains glucose, fructose (monosaccharides), and maltose (disaccharide). These sugars interact with sucrose molecules. They help prevent premature crystallization by inhibiting sucrose crystal contact. The fat also helps inhibit rapid crystallization. Controlling the crystallization of the supersaturated sugar solution is the key to making smooth fudge. Initiation of crystals before the desired time will result in fudge with fewer, larger sugar grains. The final texture would then be grainy, a quality normally indicative of low-quality fudge.\n\nOne of the most important attributes of fudge is its texture. The end-point temperature separates hard caramel from fudge. The higher the peak temperature, the more sugar is dissolved and the more water is evaporated, resulting in a higher sugar-to-water ratio. Before the availability of cheap and accurate thermometers, cooks would use the ice water test, also known as the cold water test, to determine the saturation of the confection. Fudge is made at the \"soft ball\" stage, which varies by altitude and ambient humidity from to . The heated fudge is sometimes poured onto a marble slab to be cooled and shaped.\n\nHot fudge in the United States and Canada is usually considered to be a chocolate product often used as a topping for ice cream in a heated form, particularly sundaes and parfaits. It may also occasionally be used as a topping for s'mores. It is a thick, chocolate-flavored syrup (flavored with natural or artificial flavorings) similar in flavor and texture to chocolate fudge, except melted so that it can be poured.\n\n"}
{"id": "618981", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=618981", "title": "Billiard ball", "text": "Billiard ball\n\nA billiard ball is a small, hard ball used in cue sports, such as carom billiards, pool, and snooker. The number, type, diameter, color, and pattern of the balls differ depending upon the specific game being played. Various particular ball properties such as hardness, friction coefficient and resilience are important to accuracy.\n\nEarly balls were made of various materials, including wood and clay (the latter remaining in use well into the 20th century). Although affordable ox-bone balls were in common use in Europe, elephant ivory was favored since at least 1627 until the early 20th century; the earliest known written reference to ivory billiard balls is in the 1588 inventory of the Duke of Norfolk. By the mid-19th century, elephants were being slaughtered for their ivory at an alarming rate, just to keep up with the demand for high-end billiard balls – no more than eight balls could be made from a single elephant's tusks. Dyed and numbered balls appeared around the early 1770s. The billiard industry realized that the supply of elephants (their primary source of ivory) was endangered, as well as dangerous to obtain (the latter an issue of notable public concern at the turn of the 19th century). Inventors were challenged to come up with an alternative material that could be manufactured, with a US$10,000 prize being offered by a New York supplier, Phelan and Collender. (This would be worth approximately $ in 2019.)\n\nAlthough not the first artificial substance to be used for the balls (e.g. Sorel cement, invented in 1867, was marketed as an artificial ivory), John Wesley Hyatt invented a composition material in 1869 called nitrocellulose for billiard balls (US patent 50359, the first American patent for billiard balls). It is unclear if the cash prize was ever awarded, and there is no evidence suggesting he did in fact win it. By 1870 it was commercially branded Celluloid, the first industrial plastic. However, the nature of celluloid made it volatile in production, occasionally exploding, which ultimately made this early plastic impractical. Subsequently, to avoid the problem of celluloid instability, the industry experimented with various other synthetic materials for billiard balls such as Bakelite, Crystallite and other plastic compounds.\n\nThe exacting requirements of the billiard ball are met today with balls cast from plastic materials that are strongly resistant to cracking and chipping. Currently Saluc, under the brand names Aramith and Brunswick Centennial, manufactures phenolic resin balls. Other plastics and resins such as polyester (under various trade names) and clear acrylic are also used, by competing companies such as Elephant Balls Ltd. and Frenzy Sports.\n\nIvory balls remained in use in artistic billiards competition until the late 20th century.\n\nIn the realm of carom billiards (or carambole) games, three balls are used to play straight-rail, three-cushion, balkline, five-pins, and related games on pocketless billiards tables. The exception is four-ball which needs an extra object ball. Carom balls are not numbered, and at 61–61.5 mm (between approximately and  in) in diameter are larger than pool balls. The 61.5 mm size are more common. They are typically colored as follows:\n\nPool balls are used to play various pool (pocket billiards or pool billiards) games, such as eight-ball, nine-ball and one-pocket. In North America and Asia, they are referred to simply as \"billiard balls\" (except among carom and snooker players). These balls, used the most widely throughout the world, are considerably smaller than carom billiards balls, slightly larger than British-style pool balls and substantially larger than those for snooker. According to WPA/BCA equipment specifications, the weight may be from with a diameter of , plus or minus . These are often referred to as balls. The balls are numbered and colored as in the table.\n\nIn baseball pocket billiards, the ball set is extended to 21 balls, in which the 16 ball is black and white, while balls 17 through 21 have no special design, but look exactly like balls 9 through 13, respectively, except for their numbers.\n\nBalls 1 through 7 are often referred to as and 9 through 15 as though there are many other colloquial terms for each of balls (highs and lows, etc.). Striped balls were introduced around 1889. Though it looks similar to the solids, the 8 ball is not considered a solid because it is the only ball that is black. Some games such as nine-ball do not distinguish between stripes and solids, but rather use the numbering on the balls to determine which must be pocketed. In other games such as three-ball and straight pool neither type of marking is of any consequence. In eight-ball, straight pool, and related games, all sixteen balls are employed. In the games of seven-ball, nine-ball, ten-ball and related, only object balls 1 through 7, 9 and 10, respectively (plus the cue ball) are used.\n\nSome balls used in televised pool games are colored differently in order to make them distinguishable on television monitors. Specifically, the 4 ball is colored pink instead of dark violet, and the 12 is white with a pink stripe, to make it easier to distinguish their color from the black 8 ball, and similarly the 7 and 15 balls use a light tan color instead of a deep maroon. Television was also the genesis of the cue ball with six red spots on its surface (known as a \"measle\" cue ball) so that placed on it is evident to viewers.\n\nCoin-operated pool tables such as those found at bars historically have often used either a larger (\"mudball\") or denser ceramic weighted cue ball, such that its extra weight makes it easy for the cue ball return mechanism to separate it from object balls (which are captured until the game ends and the table is paid again for another game) so that the cue ball can be returned for further play, should it be accidentally potted. In Asia and Europe, some pool tables use a smaller cue ball instead. Modern tables usually employ a magnetic ball of regulation or near-regulation size and weight, since players have complained for many decades that the heavy and often oversized cue balls do not \"play\" correctly.\n\nIn WPA blackball and its predecessor WEPF or \"English eight-ball pool\" (not to be confused with the games of eight-ball or English billiards), fifteen object balls again are used, but fall into two unnumbered , the (or less commonly ) and , with a white cue ball, and black 8 ball. Aside from the 8, shots are not since there is no reliable way to identify particular balls to be pocketed. Because they are unnumbered they are wholly unsuited to certain pool games, such as nine-ball, in which ball order is important. They are noticeably smaller than the American-style balls, and with a cue ball that is slightly smaller than the object balls, while the table's are tighter to compensate. Neither the WPA nor the WEPF (publicly) define ball or even table dimensions, though presumably league and tournament organizers are given some guidelines in this regard. Most manufacturers that supply this market provide sets that range from up to , often with a slightly smaller cue ball, e.g. for a 2-inch set. The most common object ball diameters are and . The yellow-and-red sets are sometimes commercially referred to as \"casino sets\" (they were formerly used for televised eight-ball championships, most often held in casinos). The use of such sets, however, predates television, as they were used for B.B.C. Co. Pool, the forerunner of modern eight-ball, at least as early as 1908.\n\nBall sets for the sport of snooker look at first glance like a mixture of American- and British-style pool balls. There are twenty-two balls in total, arranged as a rack of 15 unmarked reds, six placed at various predetermined spots on the table, and a white cue ball. \"(See snooker for more information on ball setup.)\"\n\nThe colour balls are sometimes numbered American-style, with their point values, for the amateur/home market, as follows in the adjacent table.\n\nSnooker balls are technically standardized at in diameter within a tolerance of plus or minus . No standard weight is defined, but all balls in the set must be the same weight within a tolerance of . However, many sets are actually , even from major manufacturers. Snooker sets are also available with considerably smaller-than-regulation balls (and even with ten instead of fifteen reds) for play on smaller tables (down to half-size), and are sanctioned for use in some amateur leagues. Sets for American snooker are typically , with numbered colour balls.\nThe set of eight colours used for snooker balls (including white) are thought to be derived from the game of croquet. Snooker was invented in 1884 by British Army officers stationed in India. Croquet reached its peak popularity at the same time, particularly amongst people in the same social context. The eight coloured balls of croquet use the same identical set of eight colours. There are many other similarities between croquet and snooker, which when taken together, suggest that the derivation of the latter owes much to the existence of the former.\n\nVarious other games have their own variants of billiard balls. English billiards balls are like carom balls but are the same size as snooker balls. Russian pyramid uses a set of fifteen numbered but otherwise all-white balls, and a red or yellow cue ball that may be even larger than carom billiards balls at 68 mm (2⁄ in) or 72 mm (2⁄ in). The related game kaisa has the same pocket and ball dimensions but uses only five balls: one yellow, two red and two cue balls, one for each player. Bumper pool requires four white and four red object balls, and two special balls, one red with a white spot and the other white with red spot; all are usually inch (approximately 52.5 mm) in diameter. Bar billiards uses six or seven white balls (depending on regional variations) and one red ball in diameter.\n\nSeveral brands of practice balls exist, which have systems of spots, stripes, differently colored halves and/or targeting rings.\n\nFor example, Saluc markets several practice ball systems, including the Jim Rempe Training Ball, a marked with rings and targets on the surface of the ball so that the practicing player can better judge the effects of very particular amounts of , , and other forms of cue ball control, and learn better control of cue . Various competing products, such as several other Saluc models and Elephant Practice Balls, use a similar aiming system. Some such sets consist of just a special cue ball and manual, while others also include an object ball marked for aiming practice.\n\nThere is a market for specialty cue balls and even entire ball sets, featuring sports team logos, cartoon characters, animal pelt patterns, etc.\n\nEntrepreneurial inventors also supply a variety of novelty billiard games with unique rules and balls, some with playing card markings, others with stars and stripes, and yet others in sets of more than thirty balls in several suits. Marbled-looking and glittery materials are also popular for home tables. There are even blacklight sets for playing in near-dark. There are also practical joke cue and 8 balls, with off-center weights in them that make their paths curve and wobble. Miniature sets in various sizes (typically or of normal size) are also commonly available, primarily intended for undersized toy tables. Even an egg-shaped ball has been patented and marketed under such names as Bobble Ball and Tag Ball.\n\nThe 8 ball is frequently used iconically in Western, especially American, culture. It can often be found as an element of T-shirt designs, album covers and names, tattoos, household goods like paperweights and cigarette lighters, belt buckles, etc. A classic toy is the Magic 8-Ball \"oracle\". A wrestler, a rapper, and a rock band have all independently adopted the name. The term \"8-ball\" is also slang both for of cocaine or crystal meth, and for a bottle of Olde English 800 malt liquor. It has also been used to refer to African-Americans, particularly those of darker skin tones, as in the film \"Full Metal Jacket\". The expression \"behind the eight [ball]\" is used to indicate a dilemma from which it is difficult to extricate oneself. The term derives from the game kelly pool. In the \"Seinfeld\" episode \"The Reverse Peephole\", the character Puddy wears a jacket featuring the eight-ball.\n\nBecause the collisions between billiard balls are nearly elastic, and the balls roll on a surface that produces low rolling friction, their behavior is often used to illustrate Newton's laws of motion. Idealized, frictionless billiard balls are a staple of mathematical theorems and physics models, and figure in dynamical billiards, scattering theory, Lissajous knots, billiard ball computing and reversible cellular automata, Polchinski's paradox, contact dynamics, collision detection, the illumination problem, atomic ultracooling, quantum mirages and elsewhere in these fields.\n\n\"Billiard balls\" or \"pool balls\" is the name given to balls used in stage magic tricks, especially the classic \"multiplying billiard balls\". Though obviously derived from real billiard balls, today they are usually smaller, for easier manipulation and hiding, but not so small and light that they are difficult to juggle, as the magic and juggling disciplines have often overlapped since their successful combination by pioneers like Paul Vandy.\n\nAn urban legend received cultural attention to many saying, \"If the Earth were the size of a billiard ball, it would be smoother\". It was used in 2008's Discover Magazine, but mistook the diameter tolerance for smoothness. If the Earth were reduced to the size of a billiard ball, much of it, excluding the Himalayas and Mariana Trench, would be smoother. (see also: Earth's Shape)\n\nThe phrase \"as smooth as a billiard ball\" is sometimes applied to describe a bald person, and the term \"cue ball\" is also slang for someone who sports a shaved head.\n\nIn Polandball, numbered pool balls are used to denote aboriginal, prehistoric, or native peoples who do not have a flag of their own. Green 6-balls also denote extraterrestrials.\n\n"}
{"id": "618993", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=618993", "title": "Surge (drink)", "text": "Surge (drink)\n\nSurge (sometimes styled as SURGE) is a citrus flavored soft drink first produced in the 1990s by The Coca-Cola Company to compete with Pepsi's Mountain Dew. Surge was advertised as having a more \"hardcore\" edge, much like Mountain Dew's advertising at the time, in an attempt to lure customers away from Pepsi. It was originally launched in Norway as Urge in 1996, and was so popular that it was later released in America as Surge. Lagging sales caused production to be ended in 2003 for most markets. \n\nHowever, popular fan bases such as Facebook's \"SURGE Movement\" led Coca-Cola to re-release the soft drink on September 15, 2014, for the US market via Amazon Prime in 12-packs of 16 oz cans. Following a test-market for the beverage in the Southeastern United States in early 2015, Surge was re-released primarily in convenience stores in the Eastern United States and some Mountain states in September 2015. Surge was re-released internationally in September 2018 in Burger King restaurants in the Coca-Cola Freestyle machines.\n\nIn 1997, Coca-Cola started production of Surge in the United States, with its original whitepaper name being \"MDK,\" or \"Mountain Dew Killer.\" It was developed to converge with Mello Yello as a means of slowing Mountain Dew growth. Coke's attempts to draw users away with divergent products like OK Soda or with similar ones like Mello Yello had not succeeded. Surge was intended to improve on Mountain Dew by using maltodextrin for a longer-lasting blast of energy and with bolder, brighter presentation. Its release was accompanied by a $50 million nationwide marketing campaign that led to high sales and popularity. A few years after the release, sales began to slip. Surge continued to be sold in vending machines, bottles, cans and as a fountains drink until its eventual discontinuation in 2003.\n\nWhile preparations for the US launch were underway, a cry for help came in from the Norwegian Division, who were battling a successful launch of Mountain Dew in their market. Because the Surge brand was already registered by another firm, the product was launched as \"Urge\". Local food regulation prevented the bright green color being used, so it was launched with a pale, more natural juice drink look and given a slight orange taste to match the flavor with the color. \nUntil September 15, 2014, when Coca-Cola re-released Surge, Norway was the only country where one could still buy a similar soft drink in any form, as the original Surge recipe was still popular there.\n\nSurge was widely associated with the extreme sports lifestyle, with television commercials similar to those used by Mountain Dew at the time. Coca-Cola also used provocative catchphrases to market Surge to extreme sports enthusiasts and teenagers alike. Some of these catchphrases included \"Feed the Rush\", \"Life's a Scream\" and the references to Surge as \"A Fully Loaded Citrus Soda.\" Further touted was the fact that Surge had a considerable number of carbohydrates, hence the \"with carbos\" tagline that was occasionally used in the marketing campaigns to emphasize the fact that Surge was supposed to be more than a soda, but an energy drink as well.\n\nAfter its inception, Surge's logo was updated and redesigned to a sharper and more modern look by a graphic designer/marketer Colin Nekritz.\n\nIn 1997 Coca-Cola settled a trademark dispute with Babson Bros., an industrial cleaning product company whose cow-milking machine has been known as Surge since 1925.\n\nAfter the discontinuation of Surge in cans, a community was formed by web designer Eric \"Karks\" Karkovack entitled \"Save Surge\". The community initially mapped the locations at which Surge could be purchased in fountain form. Upon cancellation of the fountain syrup, the community continued, adopting an approach of activism that led to the creation of the citrus soda Vault in June 2005. After Vault's release Karkovack announced the closure of SaveSurge.org. Vault was discontinued in 2011.\n\nAs a result of Vault's discontinuation, a group was started on Facebook called the \"Surge Movement\". The group repeatedly posted requests on Coca-Cola's Facebook page, and encouraged its members to call Coca-Cola's consumer affairs hotline at 1-800-GET-COKE to voice their desires further, once every month. The movement gained around 200,000 Facebook \"likes\" in the months after it was started and continues to grow.\n\nOn September 15, 2014, Surge was re-released as an Amazon.com exclusive in packs of twelve 16 oz cans.\n\nOn February 10, 2015, Coca-Cola announced that it had begun test-marketing Surge with independent resellers and vending machines across the Southeast United States. The test run ended in late-May 2015. Two months later, Coca-Cola announced that it was preparing for a large-scale Surge retail release across the Eastern United States. Surge was re-released at convenience stores across the Eastern United States on September 7, 2015.\n\nIn August, 2018, Surge became available in Coca-Cola Freestyle machines, exclusively at Burger King.\n\nOn November 16, 2015, Burger King restaurants released a slushy version of the beverage called \"Frozen Surge\" as a limited edition slushy. Burger King reintroduced it in their restaurants as a fountain drink in August, 2018 \n\nIn late 2016, Valero Corner Stores partnered with Icee to release an Icee form of Surge at select locations.\n\nOn January 11, 2017, Cinemark theaters released a slushy version of the beverage called \"Surge Frozen\" for a limited time before being discontinued in Spring 2017.\n\nComparisons of Surge have been made to a later Coca-Cola product, Vault, which was first released in 2005—around two years after the discontinuation of Surge. Vault has also been discontinued as of December 2011. The two drinks are noted to have had similar taste, although Vault contained higher levels of caffeine at 70.5 mg per 12 fl. oz serving and contained artificial flavors in its recipe. The caffeine content of Surge was comparable to that of other citrus soft drinks in the American market during its time at 51 mg per 12 fl. oz serving.\n\nBelow is a listing of the ingredients of Surge, per the label on the canned and bottled versions, as well as the ingredient listings from both a Surge fountain syrup box, and a Surge Frozen Carbonated Beverage box. All four differ slightly; however, more information regarding the Surge formulation can be gleaned from both syrup variations, as they were to be mixed using a ratio of 4.4 parts cold, carbonated water to 1 part syrup.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "619925", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=619925", "title": "Lollipop", "text": "Lollipop\n\nA lollipop is a type of sugar candy usually consisting of hard candy mounted on a stick and intended for sucking or licking. Different informal terms are used in different places, including lolly, sucker, sticky-pop, etc. Lollipops are available in many flavors and shapes.\n\nLollipops are available in a number of colors and flavors, particularly fruit flavors. With numerous companies producing lollipops, the candy now comes in dozens of flavors and many different shapes. They range from small ones which can be bought by the hundred and are often given away for free at banks, barbershops, and other locations, to very large ones made out of candy canes twisted into a circle.\n\nMost lollipops are eaten at room temperature, but \"ice lollipops\", \"ice lollies\", or \"popsicles\" are frozen water-based lollipops. Similar confections on a stick made of ice cream, often with a flavored coating, are usually not called by this name.\n\nSome lollipops contain fillings, such as bubble gum or soft candy. Some novelty lollipops have more unusual items, such as mealworm larvae, embedded in the candy.\nOther novelty lollipops have non-edible centers, such a flashing light, embedded within the candy; there is also a trend of lollipops with sticks attached to a motorized device that makes the entire lollipop spin around in one's mouth.\n\nIn the Nordic countries, Germany, and the Netherlands, some lollipops are flavored with salmiak.\n\nLollipops can be used to carry medicines.\n\nSome lollipops have been marketed for use as diet aids, although their effectiveness is untested, and anecdotal cases of weight loss may be due to the power of suggestion. Flavored lollipops containing medicine are intended to give children medicine without fuss.\n\nActiq is a powerful analgesic lollipop whose active ingredient is fentanyl. This makes for fast action; the lollipop is used, for example, by the military, and is not a way to make medicine palatable to children.\n\nThe idea of an edible candy on a stick is very simple, and it is probable that the lollipop has been invented and reinvented numerous times. The first confectioneries that closely resemble what we call lollipops date to the Middle Ages, when the nobility would often eat boiled sugar with the aid of sticks or handles.\n\nThe invention of the modern lollipop is still something of a mystery but a number of American companies in the early 20th century have laid claim to it. According to the book \"Food For Thought: Extraordinary Little Chronicles of the World\", they were invented by George Smith of New Haven, Connecticut, who started making large boiled sweets mounted on sticks in 1908. He named them after a racehorse of the time, Lolly Pop - and trademarked the lollipop name in 1931.\n\nThe term 'lollipop' was recorded by English lexicographer Francis Grose in 1796. The term may have derived from the term \"lolly\" (tongue) and \"pop\" (slap). The first references to the lollipop in its modern context date to the 1920s. Alternatively, it may be a word of Romany origin being related to the Roma tradition of selling toffee apples sold on a stick. \"Red apple\" in the Romany language is \"loli phaba\".\n\nThe main ingredient in a standard lollipop is sugar. Sugars are fully hydrated carbon chains meaning that there is a water molecule attached to each carbon. Sugars come in two forms; straight-chain and ring form. When sugars are in straight-chain form, aldehyde and ketone groups are open which leaves them very susceptible to reaction. In this state, sugars are unstable. In ring form, sugars are stable and therefore exist in this form in most foods, including lollipops.\n\nSugar is a very versatile ingredient and is used in many of food and products we consume every single day. What makes sugar different is the way it interacts with the other ingredients and systems within the food as well as how it is treated. When it is heated enough to break the molecules apart, it generates a complex flavor, changes the color, and creates a pleasing aroma. Sugar can form two types of solids in foods; crystalline and glassy amorphous. Crystalline solids can be found in food products like fondant, fudge, and butter creams. Glassy amorphous solids can be found in products like lollipops, marshmallows, and caramels. Glassy amorphous solids result when moderate sugar concentrations (50% solutions) are heated to high temperatures which nearly eliminates all moisture. The final moisture content is around 1%-2%, whereas the final moisture content in crystalline candies is 8%-12%. The non-crystalline nature of glassy amorphous solids is due to the presence of inhibitors in the solution. Without an inhibitor, crystallization would occur spontaneously and rapidly as sugar cools due to its high concentration. Some common inhibitors used in lollipop production are corn syrup, cream of tartar, honey, and butter.\n\nThe second most important ingredient in lollipop production is water. Even though at the end of the lollipop making process, the moisture content falls to less than 2%, the starting process involves water. All other ingredients used in the process of lollipop production are optional. The use of inhibitors is dependent on the type of sugar used. The amount of inhibitor in the lollipop is usually small in comparison to the amount of sugar used. On top of that, additional flavors, colorings, and inclusions (like bubble gum or a tootsie roll) can be added to the final product, but are not a part of the main structure of a simple lollipop.\n\nAlthough the main functional ingredients of a lollipop are quite simple, the actual process of making this product is where things start to get complicated. It has already been stated that a glassy amorphous structure is a non-crystalline solid. However, the formation and physical state of this glass has a lot of chemistry and physics behind it. The first step in making lollipops after mixing the main ingredients is the heating process. During heating, the molecules increase in their translational mobility and therefore become liquid-like. Although it can be found that many hard candies are heated to about 310˚F, the temperature that the solution is heated to is dependent on the specific volume and contents of the mixture. After heating is complete, the solution can then be cooled. The final cooled solution is a supersaturated due to the fact that the moisture content drops to below 2%. Supersaturated or supercooled liquids are also formed due to the fact that crystallization is being inhibited. They are unstable because crystallization is a favored reaction in this case. During the cooling process, the most important physicochemical characteristic of lollipops is occurring. This process is called glass transition.\n\nGlass transition is the solid-liquid transformation of amorphous material. It is a reversible change of the solid and liquid states of supercooled liquids. Glass transition occurs approximately 100˚C-150˚C below the equilibrium melting temperature of a pure substance. This dynamic transition is not a change of state, but a change of phase. It can be looked at in terms of a change in the molecular motion of the liquid, not a change in the molecular order itself. This transition from liquid to solid is what defines the physical appearance of a standard lollipop. The result of the glass transition is a kinetically static state of a supercooled liquid. Prior to this, as stated before, the liquid was unstable.\n\n"}
{"id": "620543", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=620543", "title": "Toffee", "text": "Toffee\n\nToffee is a confection made by caramelizing sugar or molasses (creating inverted sugar) along with butter, and occasionally flour. The mixture is heated until its temperature reaches the hard crack stage of . While being prepared, toffee is sometimes mixed with nuts or raisins.\n\nThe process of making toffee requires the boiling of ingredients until the mix is stiff enough to be pulled into a shape which holds and has a glossy surface. The resulting mixture will typically be poured into a shallow tray and allowed to cool to form a slab. Different mixes, processes, and most importantly, temperatures, will result in different textures and hardnesses, from soft and often sticky to a hard, brittle material. A brown color, and smoky taste, is imparted to the toffee by the caramelization of the sugars.\n\nA popular variant in the US is \"English toffee\", which is a very buttery toffee often made with almonds. It is available in both chewy and hard versions. Heath bars are a type of confection made with an English toffee core. Although named \"English toffee\" it bears little resemblance to the wide range of confectionery known as toffee currently available in the United Kingdom. However, one can still find this product in the UK under the name \"butter crunch.\" \n\nAnother variant is \"honeycomb toffee\", which is an aerated version with bubbles introduced by adding baking soda and vinegar while mixing. These react to form carbon dioxide, which is trapped in the highly viscous mixture. In the UK and Canada, the best known honeycomb confection is the Crunchie bar. A similar Australian chocolate bar is the Violet Crumble. In New Zealand, vanilla ice cream with pieces of honeycomb in it is called \"hokey pokey\".\n\nA particular application of toffee is in toffee apples, sometimes called candy apples, which are apples coated with hard toffee mounted on sticks. Toffee apples are similar to taffy apples and caramel apples, which are both covered in caramel.\n\nToffee used in confectionery can be mixed with many different ingredients to produce a variety of flavors: rum and butter, chocolate covered, vanilla and chocolate, rum and raisin, raspberry, and honeycomb.\n\nThe origins of the word are unknown. Food writer Harold McGee claims it to be \"from the Creole for a mixture of sugar and molasses\", but which creole language is not specified. The \"Oxford English Dictionary\" dates the first publication of the word to 1825 and identifies it as a variation of \"taffy\" (1817), both of which are first recorded as English dialectical words.\n\n"}
{"id": "620656", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=620656", "title": "Pandebono", "text": "Pandebono\n\nPandebono or pan de bono is a type of Colombian bread made of corn flour, cassava starch, cheese, eggs and in some regions of the country they put a guava jam known as bocadillo. Traditionally, it is consumed while still warm with hot chocolate a few minutes after baking. It is very popular in the Colombian department of Valle del Cauca. This bread can be made in both a round and a ring shape.\n\nIt is said that an Italian baker who lived in the Colombian city of Cali baked the bread and every afternoon went out to sell them, yelling “pane del buono” in the streets. This is how the name became popular.\n\nAnother version documented by Edouard André in his article “América Equinoccial” published in “América Pintoresca” says that the name came from a site on the road between Dagua and Cali called “Hacienda El Bono” where the product was originally made. Thus, the inhabitants of the region used to buy it and referred to it as “Pan del Bono” meaning “Bread from El Bono” and by the continued use the name was abbreviated as “Pandebono”.\n\nStill another version states that the name comes from the voucher (Spanish “bono”) the workers from the region's sugar cane farms received as part of their compensation, which could be exchanged for bread. Therefore, the name would mean “voucher bread”.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "620665", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=620665", "title": "Oakum", "text": "Oakum\n\nOakum is a preparation of tarred fibre used to seal gaps. Its main traditional applications were in shipbuilding, for caulking or packing the joints of timbers in wooden vessels and the deck planking of iron and steel ships; in plumbing, for sealing joints in cast iron pipe; and in log cabins for chinking. In ship caulking, it was forced between the seams using a hammer and a caulking iron, then sealed into place with hot pitch.\n\nThe word oakum derives from Middle English ', from Old English ', from ' (separative and perfective prefix) + ' (akin to Old English \"\", 'comb')—literally 'off-combings'.\n\nOakum was at one time recycled from old tarry ropes and cordage, which were painstakingly unravelled and reduced to fibre. The task of picking and preparation was a common occupation in prisons and workhouses, where the young or the old and infirm were put to work unpicking oakum if they were unsuited for heavier labour. Sailors undergoing naval punishment were also frequently sentenced to unpick oakum, with each man made to unpick of oakum a day. The work was tedious, slow and taxing on the worker's thumbs and fingers. In 1862, girls under 16 at Tothill Fields Bridewell had to pick a day, and boys under 16 had to pick . Over the age of 16, girls and boys had to pick per day respectively. The oakum was sold for £4 10\"s\" ( in modern money) per hundredweight (). At Coldbath Fields Prison, the men's counterpart to Tothill Fields, prisoners had to pick per day unless sentenced to hard labour, in which case they had to pick between of oakum per day.\n\nIn modern times, the fibrous material used in oakum comes from virgin hemp or jute. In plumbing and marine applications, the fibers are impregnated with tar or a tar-like substance, traditionally pine tar (also called 'Stockholm tar'), an amber-coloured pitch made from pine sap. Tar-like petroleum by-products can also be used for modern oakum. \"White oakum\" is made from untarred material, and was chiefly used as packing between brick and masonry in pre-war home and building construction, as its breathability allows moisture to continue to wick and transfer.\n\nOakum can be used to seal cast iron pipe drains. After setting the pipes together, workers pack oakum into the joints, then pour molten lead into the joint to create a permanent seal. The oakum swells and seals the joint, the \"tar\" in the oakum prevents rot, and the lead keeps the joint physically tight.\nToday, modern methods, such as rubber seals (for example, gaskets or o-rings) are more common.\n\nIn Herman Melville's novella \"Benito Cereno\", crew members of a slave ship spend their idle hours picking oakum.\n\nCharles Dickens's novel \"Oliver Twist\" mentions the extraction of oakum by orphaned children in the workhouse. The oakum extracted was for use on navy ships, and the instructor said that they were serving the country.\n\n\"The Innocents Abroad\", a travel book by Mark Twain, also mentions in chapter 37 a \"Baker's Boy/Famine Breeder\" who eats soap and oakum, but prefers oakum, which makes his breath foul and teeth stuck up with tar.\n"}
{"id": "621040", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=621040", "title": "Bread bowl", "text": "Bread bowl\n\nA bread bowl is a round loaf of bread which has had a large portion of the middle cut out to create an edible bowl. They are typically larger than a roll but smaller than a full sized loaf of bread. Bread bowls can be used to serve chili, New England-style clam chowder, and other thick stews (often, but not always, with a cheese or cream base). Soups with thinner bases are not generally served in bread bowls, as the broth would make the bread get too soggy too quickly. The bread becomes flavored as it absorbs some of the stew's base, and can be eaten after the stew has been eaten.\n\nMeals served in bread bowls can be found at some restaurants, such as the Canadian coffee chain Tim Hortons, Boudin Bakery, Panera Bread, Hearth 'n Kettle, Quizno's, Au Bon Pain, Domino's Pizza, and vendors at some Renaissance faires. It is also good to use for dips, using the scooped out bread for dipping.\n\nUse of a bread bowl can add considerably to a soup's calorie count. Calorie counts posted at Au Bon Pain, for example, state that the bread bowl contains 620 calories in addition to those in the soup itself.\n\nIn 2008 \"The Daily Telegraph\" reported that a company in Birmingham, UK, was making a naan bread version.\n\nOne of the traditional recipes that uses a bread bowl is Knorr Spinach dip made with their vegetable mix package. This classic recipe in a bread bowl is make with a round pumpernickel bread loaf. \n\n\"Coffin Lid\" () is a Taiwanese variant developed in Tainan. It uses Texas toast, preferably those cut from the soft loaves popular in East Asia, deep frying the bread to a crisp. A layer of crust is then cut away to expose the inside, which was then dug out, allowing stews to be placed in. The crust layer is then replaced on top of the stew.\n"}
{"id": "621109", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=621109", "title": "Hollandaise sauce", "text": "Hollandaise sauce\n\nHollandaise sauce ( or ; ), formerly also called Dutch sauce, is an emulsion of egg yolk, melted butter, and lemon juice (or a white wine or vinegar reduction). It is usually seasoned with salt, and either white pepper or cayenne pepper.\n\nHollandaise is one of the five mother sauces in French cuisine. It is well known as a key ingredient of eggs Benedict, and is often served on vegetables such as steamed asparagus.\n\n\"Sauce hollandaise\" is French for \"Dutch sauce\". The name implies Dutch origins, but the actual connection is unclear. The name \"Dutch sauce\" is documented in English as early as 1573, though without a recipe showing that it was the same thing. The first documented recipe is from 1651 in La Varenne's \"Le Cuisinier François\" for \"asparagus with fragrant sauce\":\n\nLa Varenne is credited with bringing sauces out of the Middle Ages with his publication and may well have invented hollandaise sauce. A more recent name for it is \"sauce Isigny\", named after Isigny-sur-Mer, which is famous for its butter. Isigny sauce is found in recipe books starting in the 19th century.\n\nBy the 19th century, sauces had been classified into four categories by Carême. One of his categories was \"allemande\", which was a stock-based sauce using egg and lemon juice. Escoffier replaced \"allemande\" with \"hollandaise\" in his list of the five mother sauces of haute cuisine. While many believe that a true hollandaise sauce should only contain the basic ingredients of eggs, butter, and lemon, Prosper Montagne suggested using either a white wine or vinegar reduction, similar to a Béarnaise sauce, to help improve the taste.\n\nIn English, the name \"Dutch sauce\" was common through the 19th century, but was largely displaced by \"hollandaise\" in the 20th.\n\nAs in other egg emulsion sauces, like mayonnaise and Béarnaise, the egg does not coagulate as in a custard; rather, the lecithin in the eggs serves as an emulsifier, allowing the mixture of the normally immiscible butter and lemon juice to form a stable emulsion.\n\nTo make hollandaise sauce, beaten egg yolks are combined with butter, lemon juice, salt, and water, and heated gently while being mixed. Some cooks use a double boiler to control the temperature. Some recipes add melted butter to warmed yolks; others call for unmelted butter and the yolks to be heated together; still others combine warm butter and eggs in a blender or food processor. Temperature control is critical, as excessive temperature can curdle the sauce.\n\nHollandaise can be frozen.\n\nBasic ingredients for the sauce are;\n\nBeing a mother sauce, hollandaise sauce is the foundation for many derivatives created by adding or changing ingredients, including:\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "621565", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=621565", "title": "Pixie Day", "text": "Pixie Day\n\nPixie Day is a tradition that takes place in Ottery St. Mary, England, annually on the Saturday nearest Mid-Summer's Day in June. Dating from 1954, and based on a pamphlet written by R. F. Delderfield for the 500th anniversary of the installation of the bells of the Church of St. Mary, the event commemorates a legend of Ottery St. Mary's 'pixies' being banished from the town (where they caused havoc) to a local cave known as 'Pixies' Parlour'.\n\nThe celebrations begin in the early afternoon when a large fête takes place on the Land of Caanan park. At 6 pm the celebrations focus on Ottery's town square. Hundreds of 'pixies' (made up of local Cubs and Brownies dressed in pixie attire) capture the St. Mary's church bell ringers and drag them from the church to the square, where a reenactment of the pixies' banishment takes place.\nThe evening climaxes back in the Land of Canaan where a huge fireworks display takes place.\n\nAs told in Delderfield's \"The pixies' revenge; or, the threat to the bells of St. Mary's Church, Ottery\", the story states that hundreds of years ago, in the early days of Christianity, the people of East Devon used to believe in pixies and spirits. A local bishop, Bishop Grandisson, decided to build a church in Otteri (later Ottery St. Mary), and commissioned a set of bells for the church to be cast in iron in the bells works in Wales. The bishop was so concerned about the bells getting destroyed that he organised an escort of monks to bring the bells to Otteri.\n\nOn hearing of this, the pixies were worried, as they knew that once the bells were installed in the church, it would be the death knell of their rule over the land. So they cast a spell over the monks and redirected them from the Otteri road, towards the road leading them to cliffs overlooking the sea at Sidmouth. Just as the monks were about to fall over the cliff, one of them stubbed his toe on a rock and said \"God bless my soul\", and immediately the spell was broken.\n\nThe bells were then brought to Otteri and installed in the church. However the pixie spell was not completely broken; each year on a day in June the 'pixies' come out and capture the town's bell ringers (and in some years the parish council) and imprison them in Pixies' Parlour to be rescued by the Vicar of Ottery St. Mary. This legend is re-enacted each year by the Cub and Brownie groups of Ottery St. Mary, with a specially constructed Pixie's Parlour in the Town Square.\n\nThe original Pixies' Parlour (a cave in sandstone) can be found along the banks of the River Otter, about a mile south of the Otter Road bridge in Ottery St. Mary.\n\nOn October 10th E4 television show, Don’t Tell the Bride re-enacted the events of Pixie Day for the wedding of Sam and Luanne Bateman.\n\n"}
{"id": "622759", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=622759", "title": "Multivitamin", "text": "Multivitamin\n\nA multivitamin is a preparation intended to serve as a dietary supplement - with vitamins, dietary minerals, and other nutritional elements. Such preparations are available in the form of tablets, capsules, pastilles, powders, liquids, or injectable formulations. Other than injectable formulations, which are only available and administered under medical supervision, multivitamins are recognized by the Codex Alimentarius Commission (the United Nations' authority on food standards) as a category of food.\n\nIn healthy people, most scientific evidence indicates that multivitamin supplements do not prevent cancer, heart disease, or other ailments, and regular supplementation is not necessary.\nHowever, specific groups of people may benefit from multivitamin supplements, for example, people with poor nutrition or those at high risk of macular degeneration.\n\nThere is no standardized scientific definition for multivitamin. In the United States, a multivitamin/mineral supplement is defined as a supplement containing three or more vitamins and minerals that does not include herbs, hormones, or drugs, where each vitamin and mineral is included at a dose below the tolerable upper intake level as determined by the Food and Drug Board, and does not present a risk of adverse health effects.\n\nMany multivitamin \"formulas\" contain vitamin C, B1, B2, B3, B5, B6, B7, B9, B12, A, E, D2 (or D3), K, potassium, iodine, selenium, borate, zinc, calcium, magnesium, manganese, molybdenum, betacarotene, and/or iron. Multivitamins are typically available in a variety of formulas based on age and sex, or (as in prenatal vitamins) based on more specific nutritional needs; a multivitamin for men might include less iron, while a multivitamin for seniors might include extra vitamin D. Some formulas make a point of including extra antioxidants. \"High-potency formulas\" include at least two-thirds of the nutrients called for by recommended dietary allowances.\n\nSome nutrients, such as calcium and magnesium, are rarely included at 100% of the recommended allowance because the pill would become too large. Most multivitamins come in capsule form; tablets, powders, liquids, and injectable formulations also exist. In the U.S., the FDA requires any product marketed as a \"multivitamin\" to contain at least three vitamins and minerals; furthermore, the dosages must be below a \"tolerable upper limit\", and a multivitamin may not include herbs, hormones, or drugs.\n\nFor certain people, particularly the elderly, supplementing the diet with additional vitamins and minerals can have health impacts; however, the majority will not benefit. People with dietary imbalances may include those on restrictive diets and those who cannot or will not eat a nutritious diet. Pregnant women and elderly adults have different nutritional needs than other adults, and a multivitamin may be indicated by a physician. Generally, medical advice is to avoid multivitamins, particularly those containing vitamin A, during pregnancy unless they are recommended by a health care professional. However, the NHS recommends 10μg of Vitamin D per day throughout the pregnancy and whilst breastfeeding, as well as 400μg of folic acid during the first trimester (first 12 weeks of pregnancy). Some individuals may need to take iron, vitamin C, or calcium supplements during pregnancy, but only on the advice of a doctor.\n\nIn the 1999–2000 National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, 52% of adults in the United States reported taking at least one dietary supplement in the last month and 35% reported regular use of multivitamin-multimineral supplements. Women versus men, older adults versus younger adults, non-Hispanic whites versus non-Hispanic blacks, and those with higher education levels versus lower education levels (among other categories) were more likely to take multivitamins. Individuals who use dietary supplements (including multivitamins) generally report higher dietary nutrient intakes and healthier diets. Additionally, adults with a history of prostate and breast cancers were more likely to use dietary and multivitamin supplements.\n\nThe amounts of each vitamin type in multivitamin formulations are generally adapted to correlate with what is believed to result in optimal health effects in large population groups. However, these standard amounts may not correlate what is optimal in certain subpopulations, such as in children, pregnant women and people with certain medical conditions and medication.\n\nThe health benefit of vitamins generally follows a biphasic dose-response curve, taking the shape of a bell curve, with the area in the middle being the safe-intake range and the edges representing deficiency and toxicity. For example, the Food and Drug Administration recommends that adults on a 2,000 calorie diet get between 60 and 90 milligrams of vitamin C per day. This is the middle of the bell curve. The upper limit is 2,000 milligrams per day for adults, which is considered potentially dangerous.\n\nIn particular, pregnant women should generally consult their doctors before taking any multivitamins: for example, either an excess or deficiency of vitamin A can cause birth defects.\n\nLong-term use of beta-carotene, vitamin A, and vitamin E supplements may shorten life, and increase the risk of lung cancer in people who smoke (especially those smoking more than 20 cigarettes per day), former smokers, people exposed to asbestos, and those who use alcohol. Many common brand supplements in the United States contain levels above the DRI/RDA amounts for some vitamins or minerals.\n\nSevere vitamin and mineral deficiencies require medical treatment and can be very difficult to treat with common over-the-counter multivitamins. In such situations, special vitamin or mineral forms with much higher potencies are available, either as individual components or as specialized formulations.\n\nMultivitamins in large quantities may pose a risk of an acute overdose due to the toxicity of some components, principally iron. However, in contrast to iron tablets, which can be lethal to children, toxicity from overdoses of multivitamins are very rare. There appears to be little risk to supplement users of experiencing acute side effects due to excessive intakes of micronutrients. There also are strict limits on the retinol content for vitamin A during pregnancies that are specifically addressed by prenatal formulas.\n\nAs noted in dietary guidelines from Harvard School of Public Health in 2008, multivitamins should not replace healthy eating, or make up for unhealthy eating. In 2015, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force analyzed studies that included data for about 450,000 people. The analysis found no clear evidence that multivitamins prevent cancer or heart disease, helped people live longer, or \"made them healthier in any way.\"\n\nProvided that precautions are taken (such as adjusting the vitamin amounts to what is believed to be appropriate for children, pregnant women or people with certain medical conditions), multivitamin intake is generally safe, but research is still ongoing with regard to what health effects multivitamins have.\n\nEvidence of health effects of multivitamins comes largely from prospective cohort studies which evaluate health differences between groups that take multivitamins and groups that do not. Correlations between multivitamin intake and health found by such studies may not result from multivitamins themselves, but may reflect underlying characteristics of multivitamin-takers. For example, it has been suggested that multivitamin-takers may, overall, have more underlying diseases (making multivitamins appear as less beneficial in prospective cohort studies). On the other hand, it has also been suggested that multivitamin users may, overall, be more health-conscious (making multivitamins appear as more beneficial in prospective cohort studies). Randomized controlled studies have been encouraged to address this uncertainty.\n\nIn February 2009, a study conducted in 161,808 postmenopausal women from the Women's Health Initiative clinical trials concluded that after eight years of follow-up \"multivitamin use has little or no influence on the risk of common cancers, cardiovascular disease, or total mortality\". Another 2010 study in the Journal of Clinical Oncology suggested that multivitamin use during chemotherapy for stage III colon cancer had no effect on the outcomes of treatment. A very large prospective cohort study published in 2011, including more than 180,000 participants, found no significant association between multivitamin use and mortality from all causes. The study also found no impact of multivitamin use on the risk of cardiovascular disease or cancer.\n\nA cohort study that received widespread media attention is the Physicians' Health Study II (PHS-II). PHS-II was a double-blind study of 14,641 male U.S. physicians initially aged 50 years or older (mean age of 64.3) that ran from 1997 to June 1, 2011. The mean time that the men were followed was 11 years. The study compared total cancer (excluding non-melanoma skin cancer) for participants taking a daily multivitamin (Centrum Silver by Pfizer) versus a placebo. Compared with the placebo, men taking a daily multivitamin had a small but statistically significant reduction in their total incidence of cancer. In absolute terms the difference was just 1.3 cancer diagnoses per 1000 years of life. The hazard ratio for cancer diagnosis was 0.92 with a 95% confidence interval spanning 0.86 - 0.998 (P = .04), this implies a benefit of between 14% and .2% over placebo in the confidence interval. No statistically significant effects were found for any specific cancers or for cancer mortality. As pointed out in an editorial in the same issue of the \"Journal of the American Medical Association\", the investigators observed no difference in the effect whether the study participants were or were not adherent to the multivitamin intervention, which diminishes the dose–response relationship. The same editorial argued that the study did not properly address the multiple comparisons problem, in that the authors neglected to fully analyze all 28 possible associations in the study—they argue if this had been done the statistical significance of the results would be lost.\n\nUsing the same PHS-II study researchers concluded that taking a daily multivitamin did not have any effect in reducing heart attacks and other major cardiovascular events, MI, stroke, and CVD mortality.\n\nOne major meta-analysis published in 2011, including previous cohort and case-control studies, concluded that multivitamin use was not significantly associated with the risk of breast cancer. It noted that one Swedish cohort study has indicated such an effect, but with all studies taken together, the association was not statistically significant. A 2012 meta-analysis of ten randomized, placebo-controlled trials published in the \"Journal of Alzheimer's Disease\" found that a daily multivitamin may improve immediate recall memory, but did not affect any other measure of cognitive function.\n\nAnother meta-analysis, published in 2013, found that multivitamin-multimineral treatment \"has no effect on mortality risk,\" and a 2013 systematic review found that multivitamin supplementation did not increase mortality and might slightly decrease it. A 2014 meta-analysis reported that there was \"sufficient evidence to support the role of dietary multivitamin/mineral supplements for the decreasing the risk of age-related cataracts.\" A 2015 meta-analysis argued that the positive result regarding the effect of vitamins on cancer incidence found in Physicians' Health Study II (discussed above) should not be overlooked despite the neutral results found in other studies.\n\nLooking at 2012 data, a study published in 2018 presented meta-analyses on cardiovascular disease outcomes and all-cause mortality. It found that \"conclusive evidence for the benefit of any supplement across all dietary backgrounds (including deficiency and sufficiency) was not demonstrated; therefore, any benefits seen must be balanced against possible risks.\"\nThe study dismissed the benefits of routinely taking supplements of vitamins C and D, beta-carotene, calcium, and selenium. Results indicated taking niacin may actually be harmful.\n\nA 2006 report by the U.S. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality concluded that \"regular supplementation with a single nutrient or a mixture of nutrients for years has no significant benefits in the primary prevention of cancer, cardiovascular disease, cataract, age-related macular degeneration or cognitive decline.\" However, the report noted that multivitamins have beneficial effects for certain sub-populations, such as people with poor nutritional status, that vitamin D and calcium can help prevent fractures in older people, and that zinc and antioxidants can help prevent age-related macular degeneration in high-risk individuals.\n\nAccording to the Harvard School of Public Health: \"...many people don’t eat the healthiest of diets. That’s why a multivitamin can help fill in the gaps, and may have added health benefits.\" The U.S. Office of Dietary Supplements, a branch of the National Institutes of Health, suggests that multivitamin supplements might be helpful for some people with specific health problems (for example, macular degeneration). However, the Office concluded that \"most research shows that healthy people who take an MVM [multivitamin] do not have a lower chance of diseases, such as cancer, heart disease, or diabetes. Based on current research, it's not possible to recommend for or against the use of MVMs to stay healthier longer.\"\n\nBecause of their categorization as a dietary supplement by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), most multivitamins sold in the U.S. are not required to undergo the testing procedures typical of pharmaceutical drugs. However, some multivitamins contain very high doses of one or several vitamins or minerals, or are specifically intended to treat, cure, or prevent disease, and therefore require a prescription or medicinal license in the U.S. Since such drugs contain no new substances, they do not require the same testing as would be required by a New Drug Application, but were allowed on the market as drugs due to the Drug Efficacy Study Implementation program.\n\nVitamins are classed as low-risk medications by the Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA), and are therefore not assessed for efficacy, unlike most medicines sold in Australia. They require that the product is safe and that claims of efficacy can only be made in regards to minor ailments. No claims can be made about serious conditions. The TGA does not examine the contents of the product and whether it is what the label says it is, but they claim to carry out \"targeted and random surveillance of products on the market.\" They encourage people to report any unsafe products to them.\n\nThe TGA, however, has been criticized, by people such as Allan Asher, a regulatory expert and former deputy chair of the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission, for allowing more than a thousand types of claim, 86% of which are not supported by scientific evidence, including \"softens hardness\", \"replenishes gate of vitality\" and \"moistens dryness in the triple burner\".\n\n\n"}
{"id": "623596", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=623596", "title": "Feijoada", "text": "Feijoada\n\nFeijoada () is a stew of beans with beef and pork of Portuguese origin. It is commonly prepared in Portugal, Macau, Angola, Cape Verde, Guinea-Bissau, Mozambique, Timor, Goa, India and Brazil, where it is also considered a national dish. However, the recipe differs slightly from one country to another.\n\nThe name comes from \"feijão\", Portuguese for \"beans\".\n\nThe basic ingredients of feijoada are beans with fresh pork or beef. In Brazil, it is usually made with black beans (Feijoada à Brasileira). The stew is best prepared over low heat in a thick clay pot.\nIt is usually served with rice and assorted sausages such as \"chouriço\", \"morcela\" (blood sausage), \"farinheira\", and others, which may or may not be cooked in the stew.\n\nThe practice of cooking a meat (pork) stew with vegetables that gave origin to the feijoada from the Minho Province in Northern Portugal is a millenary Mediterranean tradition that can be traced back to the period when the Romans colonized Iberia. Roman soldiers would bring this habit to every Latin settlement, i.e., all of the provinces of Romania, the Vulgar Latin speaking area of Europe (not to be confused with the modern country solely), and this heritage is the source of many national and regional dishes of today's Europe, such as the French cassoulet, the Milanese cassoeula from Lombardy, Italy, the Romanian fasole cu cârnați, the fabada asturiana from Northwestern Spain, and the also Spanish cocido madrileño and olla podrida, not to mention non-Romanic regions with similar traditions that might be derived from this millennial Roman soldiers' dish like the Polish tsholem and golonka.\n\nFasolada, labeled the Greek national dish is related to the ancient Greek dish of broad beans, vegetables, and grains, with no meat, unlike the Italian fagiolata and the Portuguese feijoada, which was used as food and sacrifice to Greek God Apollo during the Pyanopsia festival.\n\nMany modern variants of the dish are based on feijoada recipes popularized in the Brazilian regions of Rio de Janeiro, São Paulo, Recife and Salvador. In Brazil, feijoada (feijoada brasileira) is often considered a national dish.\n\nRegistered for the first time in Recife, state of Pernambuco, feijoada has been described as a national dish of Brazil, especially of Rio de Janeiro, as other parts of Brazil have other regional dishes. The Brazilian version of feijoada (feijoada brasileira) is prepared with black beans, a variety of salted pork or beef products, such as pork trimmings (ears, tail, feet), bacon, smoked pork ribs, and at least two types of smoked sausage and jerked beef (loin and tongue). In some regions of the northeast, like Bahia and Sergipe, vegetables like cabbage, kale, potatoes, carrots, okra, pumpkin, chayote and sometimes banana are frequently added, at the end of the cooking, on top of the meat, so they are cooked by the vapors of the beans and meat stew.\nThe final dish has the beans and meat pieces barely covered by a dark purplish-brown broth. The taste is strong, moderately salty but not spicy, dominated by the flavors of black bean and meat stew. It is customary to serve it with white rice and oranges, the latter to help with digestion, as well as stir-fried, chopped collard greens and manioc flour.\n\n\"Feijão com arroz\" is the rice and black beans without the addition of the meat.\n\nDepending on the region of Brazil, the type of bean used in feijoada varies. While in some regions like Rio de Janeiro or Minas Gerais, feijoada is typically prepared with black beans, others in Goias and Bahia brown or red is preferred.\n\nAs a celebratory dish, feijoada is traditionally served on Saturday afternoons or Sunday lunch and intended to be a leisurely midday meal. It is meant to be enjoyed throughout the day and not eaten under rushed circumstances. The meal is usually eaten among extended family and paired with an event like watching a soccer game or other social event. Because of the dish's heavy ingredients and rich flavors, feijoada is viewed as Brazilian soul food. In the city of São Paulo, feijoada is a common dish on restaurants on Wednesdays, mainly in the commercial area. In Rio de Janeiro, restaurants traditionally serve it on Fridays. The dish is normally served with a choice among a selection of meats, e.g. pork, bacon, pig ears, pig feet, to fulfill the customer`s needs. Other variations of feijoada, such as the low fat version or the vegetarian. The dish is frequently compared to American Southern Soul Food which share many similarities in terms of ingredients and taste.\n\nAccording to legend, the origins of Brazil’s national dish, feijoada, stem from the country’s history with slavery. Slaves would supposedly craft this hearty dish out of black beans and pork leftovers given to them from their households. These leftovers included pig feet, ears, tail, and other portions seen as unfit for the master and his family. However, this theory has recently been contested and considered more of a modern advertising technique for the dish rather than a basis for its origins. Instead, scholars argue that the history of feijoada traces back to Brazil’s cultivation of black beans. Because of the crop’s relatively low cost of production and the simplicity of its maintenance, the beans became a staple food among European settlers in Brazil. Although black beans were eaten by both the upper-classes and the poor, the upper-classes particularly enjoyed them with an assortment of meat and vegetables, similar to feijoada, while the poor and enslaved usually ate a mixture of black beans and manioc flour. \n\n"}
{"id": "623600", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=623600", "title": "Mike the Headless Chicken", "text": "Mike the Headless Chicken\n\nMike the Headless Chicken (April 20, 1945 – March 17, 1947), also known as Miracle Mike, was a Wyandotte chicken that lived for 18 months after his head had been cut off. Although the story was thought by many to be a hoax, the bird's owner took him to the University of Utah in Salt Lake City to establish the facts.\n\nOn September 10, 1945, farmer Lloyd Olsen of Fruita, Colorado, was planning to eat supper with his mother-in-law and was sent out to the yard by his wife to bring back a chicken. Olsen chose a five-and-a-half-month-old Wyandotte chicken named Mike. The axe removed the bulk of the head, but missed the jugular vein, leaving one ear and most of the brain stem intact.\n\nDue to Olsen's failed attempt to behead Mike, the chicken was still able to balance on a perch and walk clumsily. He attempted to preen, peck for food, and crow, though with limited success; his \"crowing\" consisted of a gurgling sound made in his throat. When Mike did not die, Olsen instead decided to care for the bird. He fed it a mixture of milk and water via an eyedropper, and gave it small grains of corn and worms.\n\nOnce his fame had been established, Mike began a career of touring sideshows in the company of such other creatures as a two-headed baby. He was also photographed for dozens of magazines and papers, and was featured in \"Time\" and \"Life\" magazines. Mike was put on display to the public for an admission cost of 25 cents. At the height of his popularity, the chicken's owner earned US$4,500 per month ($ today); Mike was valued at $10,000.\n\nIn March 1947, at a motel in Phoenix on a stopover while traveling back from tour, Mike started choking in the middle of the night. He had managed to get a kernel of corn in his throat. The Olsens had inadvertently left their feeding and cleaning syringes at the sideshow the day before, and so were unable to save Mike. Olsen claimed that he had sold the bird off, resulting in stories of Mike still touring the country as late as 1949. Other sources say that the chicken's severed trachea could not properly take in enough air to be able to breathe, and it therefore choked to death in the motel.\n\nIt was determined that the axe had missed the jugular vein and a clot had prevented Mike from bleeding to death. Although most of his head was severed, most of his brain stem and one ear were left on his body. Since basic functions (breathing, heart rate, etc.) as well as most of a chicken's reflex actions are controlled by the brain stem, Mike was able to remain quite healthy. This is a good example of central motor generators enabling basic homeostatic functions to be carried out in the absence of higher brain centres.\n\nMike the Headless Chicken is now an institution in Fruita, Colorado, with an annual \"Mike the Headless Chicken Day\", the third weekend of May, starting in 1999. Events held include the \"5K Run Like a Headless Chicken Race\", egg toss, \"Pin the Head on the Chicken\", the \"Chicken Cluck-Off\", and \"Chicken Bingo\", in which chicken droppings on a numbered grid choose the numbers.\n\nMike the Headless Chicken was an inspiration for the poultry-themed comedy punk band The Radioactive Chicken Heads, serving as the subject of their 2008 song \"Headless Mike\", for which a music video was filmed. The band also features a Headless Mike puppet which is frequently used in their live shows.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "624879", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=624879", "title": "Corn Pops", "text": "Corn Pops\n\nCorn Pops is a puffed grain breakfast cereal made by Kellogg's, described by the company as \"crunchy sweetened popped-up corn cereal.\" The cereal was introduced in 1950 as Corn Pops. In 1951, the name was changed to Sugar Corn Pops and later it was called Sugar Pops. It was the sponsor for \"The Adventures of Wild Bill Hickok\" radio and television show. The name was changed to Sugar Corn Pops in 1978, and finally to Corn Pops in 1984, a time when many cereals dropped the word \"sugar\" from their titles for marketing reasons. In January 2006, the name of the cereal was changed to Pops, but after a few months of poor reception, was changed back to Corn Pops.\n\nIn mid-2007, Corn Pops launched its first line extension in many years called \"Chocolate Peanut Butter Pops\". In 2012, \"Cinnamon Corn Pops\" were introduced.\n\nCorn Pops are made from milled corn. Though the name of the cereal is 'Corn' Pops, since January 2004, its ingredients have included wheat starch, essentially making the cereal multigrain. By 2007, Coconut Oil was added to the US ingredients.\nThe American version features an irregular, flattened, smooth elliptical, shape; Canadian Corn Pops look very different; they are uniformly spherical and have a porous surface, similar to Kix cereal. The taste and texture of the Canadian and American versions of the cereal differ considerably despite sharing the same name and manufacturer. Kellogg's says this is due to raw ingredients and the regulatory agencies that exist in a particular country, and that its cereal differs by country also by virtue of marketing and culture. Research is done in different countries to determine preferences, and the formula for the cereal is changed accordingly, affecting the texture, color, and nutrition. The fat, cholesterol, and protein content is the same.\n\nUnlike the vast majority of breakfast cereals, Corn Pops in the USA had been packaged in a foil-lined bag until the mid-2010s. This helped to prevent the Pops from going stale and from secreting a sticky substance that caused the corn pops to stick together (a problem caused by the method by which the cereal is processed). Honey Smacks, another Kellogg's puffed grain cereal, used the same bag Corn Pops used. However, the Canadian version of Corn Pops had long been packaged in a standard plastic cereal bag, now used for American pops as well.\n\nAlthough the cereal contains partially hydrogenated fats, it is marketed as trans-fat free since the amount of trans fat per serving is less than the threshold 0.5 grams/serving. The cereal also contains monoglycerides and diglycerides, used to bind saturated fat, and butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT), a preservative.\n\nGuy Madison, the star of \"The Adventures of Wild Bill Hickok\" television show, appeared on the box from 1951 through 1958, occasionally replaced by sidekick Jingles played by Andy Devine. Between 1959 and 1967, the mascot was Woody Woodpecker. The next mascot for the cereal was \"Sugar Pops Pete,\" a prairie dog dressed as a cowboy with two \"six-shooters\" with red and white spiral-striped barrels. Pete and the other actors in the commercial sang the jingle: \"Oh, the Pops are sweeter and the taste is new. They're shot with sugar, through and through... Sugar Pops are tops!\" From 1968 to 1977, the mascot was the \"Whippersnapper,\" a live-action, whip-cracking cowboy. 1979-80 introduced the mascot \"Big Yella,\" a cartoon cowboy in a huge yellow ten-gallon hat, yellow chaps, boots, shirt and vest who tried to trade his collection of giant yellow objects for a bowl of Corn Pops. From 1980 to 1983, a porcupine named \"Poppy\" represented the cereal. Poppy carried around a yellow suitcase which contained a complete breakfast setting, meeting the by-then industry-standard \"part of a complete breakfast\" tagline. In early 2009, a live actor dressed up as a Corn Pops puff became the new mascot of Corn Pops. Then, in mid-2009, Kellogg's introduced an alternative mascot named the \"Sweet Toothasaur,\" consisting of the upside down bottom half of an actor's face, with a green felt cap with googly eyes and red paper horns on the actor's chin.\n\n\nNumerous ad campaigns used John Williams' theme from \"Jaws\".\n\nUnlike American Corn Pops, in Canada and in Europe (in France it is called Miel Pops – meaning Honey Pops) the cereal consists of small, spherical, uniform balls. Both versions are crunchier and have a different taste.\n\nIn the early 1990s, Corn Pops were introduced in the United Kingdom, but by the late 1990s were no longer available. The tagline used in the UK was different: \"You can't stop a corn popper popping more corn.\" Corn Pops sponsored UK boy band Take That's 1994 tour, known as \"The Pops Tour\".\nRecently, they have been revived as \"Honey Pops\" to suit the European market, and have \"Pops\" from \"Miel Pops\" as its mascot, as well as for Honey Loops, replacing \"Loopy\".\n\n"}
{"id": "624924", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=624924", "title": "Hunny B's", "text": "Hunny B's\n\nHunny B's was a breakfast cereal made by Kellogg's under license from Disney, described by the company as a \"naturally sweetened honey-graham cereal.\" The individual cereal pieces were in the shape of the letter \"B\", with biscuits in the shapes of honey pots, Pooh's head and bees (for a time, biscuits in the shape of Piglet's head were also included).\n\nIt was only available in the 9 oz (255 g) size.\n\nIt was classified as kosher dairy.\n\nCorn meal, graham flour, brown sugar, sugar, salt, high fructose corn syrup, calcium carbonate, wheat starch, honey, baking soda, caramel color, artificial cream flavor, iron, sodium ascorbate and ascorbic acid (vitamin C), niacinamide, red #40, yellow #5, zinc oxide, blue #1, pyridoxine hydrochloride (vitamin B), yellow #6, riboflavin (vitamin B), thiamin hydrochloride (vitamin B), vitamin A palmitate, BHT (preservative), folic acid, turmeric color, vitamin D, and vitamin B.\n"}
{"id": "624943", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=624943", "title": "Disney Mickey's Magix", "text": "Disney Mickey's Magix\n\nDisney Mickey's Magix was a breakfast cereal made by Kellogg's and Disney in the United States, described by the company as a \"naturally sweetened toasted oat cereal with marshmallows.\" Its box noted a unique feature of the cereal: \"Wow! The milk turns blue!\". In 2003, along with revised marshmallows, the changing color of milk became purple.\n\nThe packaging and cereal themes were based on Mickey Mouse's appearance in \"The Sorcerer's Apprentice\" segment of the 1940 film \"Fantasia\", or the Disney theme park show Fantasmic!\n\nThe cereal was sold in various sizes, including 11.8 ounces, 32.5 ounces, and 1.02 ounces, individually and specially marked.\n\nMilled corn, rice, brown sugar, salt, malt flavoring, baking soda, ascorbic acid (vitamin C), iron, niacinamide, turmeric color, zinc oxide, pyridoxine hydrochloride (vitamin B), riboflavin (vitamin B), thiamin hydrochloride (vitamin B), vitamin A palmitate, folic acid, vitamin B, and vitamin D.\n\n"}
{"id": "625565", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=625565", "title": "Pho", "text": "Pho\n\nPhở or pho (, , ; ) is a Vietnamese soup consisting of broth, rice noodles called , a few herbs, and meat, primarily made with either beef () or chicken (). Pho is a popular street food in Vietnam and a specialty in a number of restaurant chains around the world. Pho originated in the early 20th century in northern Vietnam, and was popularized throughout the rest of the world by refugees after the Vietnam War. Because pho's origins are poorly documented, there is significant disagreement over the cultural influences that led to its development in Vietnam, as well as the etymology of the word itself. The Hanoi and Saigon styles of pho differ by noodle width, sweetness of broth, and choice of herbs. \n\nPho likely evolved from similar dishes; for example, villagers in say they ate pho long before the French colonial period. The modern form of the dish emerged between 1900 and 1907 in northern Vietnam, southeast of Hanoi in Nam Định Province, then a substantial textile market. The traditional home of pho is reputed to be the villages of and (or ) in Đông Xuân commune, Nam Trực District, Nam Định Province. \n\nCultural historian and researcher Trịnh Quang Dũng believes that the popularization and origins of the modern pho stemmed from the intersection of several historical and cultural factors in the early 20th century. These include the higher availability of beef due to French demand, which in turn produced beef bones that were purchased by Chinese workers to make into a dish similar to pho called . The demand for this dish was initially the greatest with workers sourced from the provinces of Yunnan and Guangdong, who found affinity to the dish due to its similarities to that of their homeland, which eventually popularized and familiarized this dish with the general population.\n\nPho was originally sold at dawn and dusk by roaming street vendors, who shouldered mobile kitchens on carrying poles (). From the pole hung two wooden cabinets, one housing a cauldron over a wood fire, the other storing noodles, spices, cookware, and space to prepare a bowl of pho. The heavy was always shouldered by men. They kept their heads warm with distinctive, disheveled felt hats called .\n\nHanoi's first two fixed pho stands were a Vietnamese-owned Cát Tường on Cầu Gỗ Street and a Chinese-owned stand in front of Bờ Hồ tram stop. They were joined in 1918 by two more on Quạt Row and Đồng Row. Around 1925, a Vân Cù villager named Vạn opened the first \"Nam Định style\" pho stand in Hanoi. declined in number around 1936–1946 in favor of stationary eateries.\n\nIn the late 1920s, various vendors experimented with , sesame oil, tofu, and even \"Lethocerus indicus\" extract (). This \"\" failed to enter the mainstream.\n\n, served with rare beef, had been introduced by 1930. Chicken pho appeared in 1939, possibly because beef was not sold at the markets on Mondays and Fridays at the time.\n\nWith the partition of Vietnam in 1954, over a million people fled North Vietnam for South Vietnam. Pho, previously unpopular in the South, suddenly took off. No longer confined to northern culinary traditions, variations in meat and broth appeared, and additional garnishes, such as lime, Mung bean sprouts (), culantro (), cinnamon basil (), Hoisin sauce (), and hot chili sauce () became standard fare. also began to rival fully cooked in popularity. Migrants from the North similarly popularized sandwiches.\n\nMeanwhile, in North Vietnam, private pho restaurants were nationalized () and began serving pho noodles made from old rice. Street vendors were forced to use noodles made of imported potato flour. Officially banned as capitalism, these vendors prized portability, carrying their wares on and setting out plastic stools for customers.\n\nDuring the so-called \"\" following the Vietnam War, state-owned pho eateries served a meatless variety of the dish known as \"pilotless pho\" (), in reference to the U.S. Air Force's s. The broth consisted of boiled water with MSG added for taste, as there were often shortages on various foodstuffs like meat and rice during that period. Bread or cold rice was often served as a side dish, leading to the present-day practice of dipping in pho.\n\nPho eateries were privatized as part of Đổi Mới. However, many street vendors must still maintain a light footprint to evade police enforcing the street tidiness rules that replaced the ban on private ownership.\n\nIn the aftermath of the Vietnam War, Vietnamese refugees brought pho to many countries. Restaurants specializing in pho appeared in numerous Asian enclaves and Little Saigons, such as in Paris and in major cities in the United States, Canada and Australia. In 1980, the first of hundreds of pho restaurants opened in the Little Saigon in Orange County, California.\n\nIn the United States, pho began to enter the mainstream during the 1990s, as relations between the U.S. and Vietnam improved. At that time Vietnamese restaurants began opening quickly in Texas and California, spreading rapidly along the Gulf and West Coasts, as well as the East Coast and the rest of the country. During the 2000s, pho restaurants in the United States generated US$500 million in annual revenue, according to an unofficial estimate. Pho can now be found in cafeterias at many college and corporate campuses, especially on the West Coast.\n\nThe word \"pho\" was added to the \"Shorter Oxford English Dictionary\" in 2007. Pho is listed at number 28 on \"World's 50 most delicious foods\" compiled by \"CNN Go\" in 2011. The Vietnamese Embassy in Mexico celebrated Pho Day on April 3, 2016, with Osaka Prefecture holding a similar commemoration the following day. Pho has been adopted by other Southeast Asian cuisines, including Hmong cuisine. It sometimes appears as \"Phô\" on menus in Australia.\n\nReviews of 19th and 20th century Indochinese literature have found that pho entered the mainstream sometime in the 1910s. Phạm Đình Hổ's 1827 Hán-Nôm dictionary \"Nhật dụng thường đàm\" includes an entry for rice noodles () with the definition 羅𩛄普𤙭 (), borrowing a character ordinarily pronounced \"phổ\" or \"phơ\" to refer to pho. Georges Dumoutier's extensive 1907 account of Vietnamese cuisine omits any mention of pho, while Nguyễn Công Hoan recalls its sale by street vendors in 1913. A 1931 dictionary is the first to define as a soup: \"from the word . A dish consisting of small slices of rice cake boiled with beef.\"\n\nPossibly the earliest English-language reference to pho was in the book \"Recipes of All Nations\", edited by Countess Morphy in 1935: In the book, pho is described as \"an Annamese soup held in high esteem ... made with beef, a veal bone, onions, a bayleaf, salt, and pepper, and a small teaspoon of \"nuoc-mam\"\".\"\n\nThere are two prevailing theories on the origin of the word and, by extension, the dish itself. As author Nguyễn Dư notes, both questions are significant to Vietnamese identity.\n\nFrench settlers commonly ate beef, whereas Vietnamese traditionally ate pork and chicken and used cattle as beasts of burden. Gustave Hue (1937) equates to the French beef stew (literally, \"pot on the fire\"). Accordingly, Western sources generally maintain that is derived from in both name and substance. However, several scholars dispute this etymology on the basis of the stark differences between the two dishes. Ironically, pho in French has long been pronounced rather than : in Jean Tardieu's \"Lettre de Hanoï à Roger Martin Du Gard\" (1928), a soup vendor cries \"Pho-ô!\" in the street.\n\nMany Hanoians explain that the word derives from French soldiers' ordering \"\" (fire) from , referring to both the steam rising from a bowl of pho and the wood fire seen glowing from a in the evening.\n\nFood historian Erica J. Peters argues that the French have embraced pho in a way that overlooks its origins as a local improvisation, reinforcing \"an idea that the French brought modern ingenuity to a traditionalist Vietnam\".\n\nIt is also sometimes assumed that the names of the varieties of pho, specifically (beef) and (chicken), are also of French or even Latin origin, as Latin and mean \"cattle\" and \"chicken\", respectively. But this is an apparent coincidence, as and are native Vietnamese words.\n\nHue and Eugèn Gouin (1957) both define by itself as an abbreviation of . Elucidating on the 1931 dictionary, Gouin and Lê Ngọc Trụ (1970) both give as a corruption of (), which was commonly sold by Chinese immigrants in Hanoi. ( is an allophone of in some northern dialects of Vietnamese.)\n\nSome scholars argue that pho (the dish) evolved from , a Vietnamese dish common in Hanoi at the turn of the century. Originally eaten by commoners near the Red River, it consisted of stir-fried strips of water buffalo meat served in broth atop rice vermicelli. Around 1908–1909, the shipping industry brought an influx of laborers. Vietnamese and Chinese cooks set up to serve them but later switched to inexpensive scraps of beef set aside by butchers who sold to the French. Chinese vendors advertised this by crying out, \"Beef and noodles!\" (). Eventually the street cry became \"Meat and noodles!\" (), with the last syllable elongated. Nguyễn Ngọc Bích suggests that the final \"n\" was eventually dropped because of the similar-sounding (). The French author Jean Marquet refers to the dish as \"!\" in his 1919 novel \"Du village-à-la cité\". This is likely what the Vietnamese poet Tản Đà calls \"\" in \"\" (\"Gambling\"), written around 1915–1917.\n\nPho is served in a bowl with a specific cut of flat rice noodles in clear beef broth, with thin cuts of beef (steak, fatty flank, lean flank, brisket). Variations feature slow-cooked tendon, tripe, or meatballs in southern Vietnam. Chicken pho is made using the same spices as beef, but the broth is made using chicken bones and meat, as well as some internal organs of the chicken, such as the heart, the undeveloped eggs and the gizzard. \n\nWhen eating at phở stalls in Vietnam, customers are generally asked which parts of the beef they would like and how they want it done. \n\nBeef parts including:\n\nFor chicken phở, options might include:\n\nThe medium-width dried rice noodle that is usually used is called , but some versions may be made with fresh rice noodles called in Vietnamese or kuay tiao. These noodles are labeled on packaging as (fresh pho noodles) in Vietnamese, (fresh Chaozhou kuy teav) in Chinese, (Vietnamese rice noodle) in Korean, and (thin kuy teav) in Thai.\n\nThe broth for beef pho is generally made by simmering beef bones, oxtails, flank steak, charred onion, charred ginger and spices. For a more intense flavor, the bones may still have beef on them. Chicken bones also work and produce a similar broth. Seasonings can include Saigon cinnamon or other kinds of cinnamon as alternatives (may use usually in stick form, sometimes in powder form in pho restaurant franchises overseas), star anise, roasted ginger, roasted onion, black cardamom, coriander seed, fennel seed, and clove. The broth takes several hours to make. For chicken pho, only the meat and bones of the chicken are used in place of beef and beef bone. The remaining spices remain the same, but the charred ginger can be omitted, since its function in beef pho is to subdue the quite strong smell of beef.\n\nThe spices, often wrapped in cheesecloth or a soaking bag to prevent them from floating all over the pot, usually contain cloves, star anise, coriander seed, fennel, cinnamon, black cardamom, ginger, and onion.\n\nCareful cooks often roast ginger and onion over an open fire for about a minute before adding them to the stock, to bring out their full flavor. They also skim off all the impurities that float to the top while cooking; this is the key to a clear broth. (fish sauce) is added toward the end.\n\nVietnamese dishes are typically served with lots of greens, herbs, vegetables, and various other accompaniments, such as dipping sauces, hot and spicy pastes such as Sriracha, and a squeeze of lime or lemon juice; it may also be served with hoisin sauce. The dish is garnished with ingredients such as green onions, white onions, Thai basil (not to be confused with sweet basil), fresh Thai chili peppers, lemon or lime wedges, bean sprouts, and cilantro (coriander leaves) or culantro. Fish sauce, hoisin sauce, chili oil and hot chili sauce (such as Sriracha sauce) may be added to taste as accompaniments.\n\nSeveral ingredients not generally served with pho may be ordered by request. Extra-fatty broth (\"nước béo\") can be ordered and comes with scallions to sweeten it. A popular side dish ordered upon request is \"hành dấm\", or vinegared white onions.\n\nThe several regional variants of pho in Vietnam, particularly divided between \"Northern pho\" (') and \"southern pho\" or \"Saigon pho\" ('). Northern pho by the use of blanched whole green onion, and garnishes offered generally include only diced green onion and cilantro, garlic, chili sauce and quẩy. On the other hand, southern Vietnamese pho broth is less oily and consumed with bean sprouts, fresh sliced chili, hoisin sauce and a greater variety of fresh herbs. Pho may be served with either pho noodles or kuy teav noodles (). The variations in meat, broth, and additional garnishes such as lime, bean sprouts, \"ngò gai\" (\"Eryngium foetidum\"), \"húng quế\" (Thai/Asian basil), and \"tương đen\" (bean sauce/hoisin sauce), \"tương ớt\" (hot chili sauce, e.g., Sriracha sauce) appear to be innovations made by or introduced to the South. Another style of northern phở is Phở Nam Định from Nam Định city.\n\nPhở has many variants including many dishes bearing the name \"phở\", many are not soup-based:\n\n\nInternational variants include pho made using unconventional ingredients such as seafood, tofu and vegetable broth for vegetarians (), and a larger variety of vegetables, such as carrots and broccoli.\n\nVietnamese beef soup can also refer to , which is a spicy beef noodle soup, is associated with in central Vietnam.\n\nFamous pho shops in Hanoi are Phở Gia Truyền, Phở Thìn, Phở Bát Đàn, Phở Lý Quốc Sư. \n\nFamous pho shops in Saigon included , , , , and . Pasteur Street () was a street famous for its beef pho, while Hien Vuong Street () was known for its chicken pho. At Phở Bình, American soldiers dined as Việt Cộng agents planned the Tết Offensive just upstairs. Nowadays in Ho Chi Minh City, well known restaurants include: Phở Hùng, Phở Hòa Pasteur and Phở 2000, which U.S. President Bill Clinton visited in 2000.\n\nOne of the largest pho chain in Vietnam is Pho 24, a subsidiary of Highlands Coffee, with 60 locations in Vietnam and 20 abroad. The largest pho chain in the United States is Phở Hòa, which operates over 70 locations in seven countries. A similar restaurant named Pho 75 serves in the Washington, D.C. and Philadelphia, Pennsylvania areas in the United States.\n\nMany pho restaurants in the United States offer oversized helpings with names such as \"train pho\" (), \"airplane pho\" (), or \"California pho\" (). Some restaurants have offered a pho eating challenge, with prizes for finishing as much as of pho in one sitting, or have auctioned special versions costing $5,000. \n\n"}
{"id": "625651", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=625651", "title": "Horchata", "text": "Horchata\n\nHorchata (; ), or (), is a name given to various plant milk beverages of similar taste and appearance.\n\nHorchata, which comes from the Latin term \"Hordeata\", which in turn comes from \"Hordeum\" (Barley), is a term related to a Mediterranean tradition of grain-based beverages. The Valencian or Chufa horchata is made with dried and sweetened tiger nuts (\"Cyperus esculentus\"). This form of horchata is now properly called \"horchata de chufa\" or, in West African countries such as Nigeria and Mali, \"kunnu aya\". It spread to Iberia (now Spain) with the Muslim conquest, prior to 1000CE. There are 13th-century records of a \"horchata\"-like beverage made near Valencia.\n\nFrom Valencia, where it remained popular, the concept of Horchata was brought to the New World. Here, drinks called \"agua de horchata\" or simply \"horchata\" came to be made with white rice and cinnamon or \"Canella\" instead of tiger nuts. Sometimes these drinks had vanilla added, or were served adorned with fruit.\n\nToday, these and other similarly-flavoured plant milk beverages are sold in various parts of the world as varieties of horchata or kunnu.\n\nThe drink now known as \"horchata de chufa\" (also sometimes called \"horchata de chufas\" or, in West African countries such as Nigeria and Mali, \"kunnu aya\") is the original form of horchata. It is made from soaked, ground and sweetened tiger nuts. According to researchers at the University of Ilorin, \"kunnu\" made from tiger nuts is an inexpensive source of protein.\n\nIt remains popular in Spain, where a regulating council exists to ensure the quality and traceability of the product in relation to the Designation of Origin. There, it is served ice-cold as a natural refreshment in the summer, often served with fartons. \"Horchata de chufa\" is also used instead of dairy milk by the lactose-intolerant.\n\nThe majority of the Spanish tiger nut crop is utilised in the production of \"horchata de chufa\". Alboraya is the most important production centre.\n\nIn rare instances, various forms of aflatoxin may be present in \"horchata de chufa\".\n\n\"Horchata de arroz\" is made of rice, sometimes with vanilla and typically with \"Canella\" or cinnamon.\n\nIt is the most common variety of horchata in Mexico and Guatemala. In the U.S., it is popular in taquerias and Mexican ice cream shops.\n\nIn Alvarado, \"horchata de arroz\" is scented with Súchil flowers.\n\nThough horchata de arroz was once typically homemade, it is now available in both ready-to-drink (shelf-stable or refrigerated) and powdered form in grocery stores, principally in the U.S. and Latin America.\n\nHorchata de arroz is one of the three typical drink flavors of Mexican aguas frescas, together with tamarindo and Jamaica.\n\n\"Horchata de \" (\"sesame horchata\") is made with ground sesame seeds. In Puerto Rico, it is typically made by boiling sugar, vanilla, and cinnamon sticks in water, and then pouring the infusion over ground sesame seeds to be left overnight. The mixture is then strained through a cheesecloth. Some recipes call for added ground rice, ground almonds, evaporated milk, coconut milk, allspice and rum, or barley and lime zest.\n\nHorchata is also made with sesame seeds, water and sugar in Zulia, an area in the west of Venezuela.\n\n\"Horchata de Melón\" is made of ground melon seeds.\n\n\"Horchata de morro\" is made from ground calabash seeds. It is the most widely consumed variety of horchata in El Salvador and can be found across the country. It can also be found in Salvadoran restaurants in the U.S.\n\nIn the Central American countries of El Salvador, Nicaragua, Honduras, and Costa Rica, horchata refers to the drink known as \"semilla de jicaro\", made from the jicaro seeds ground with rice and spices such as ground cocoa, cinnamon, sesame seeds, nutmeg, tiger nuts and vanilla. Ground peanuts, almonds and cashews may be added. Because of these ingredients, the horchata is usually strained before serving.\n\nIn Ecuador, horchata is a clear red infusion of 18 herbs, and is most famous in the province of Loja.\n\nHorchata as a flavor makes appearances in ice cream, cookies and other sweets, and other products such as Rumchata, an alcoholic tribute to the beverage. Some smoothie shops, cafés, and McDonald's in the U.S. have been experimenting with horchata-flavored frappes.\n\nThe name derives from Valencian ', probably from \"ordiata\", made from \"ordi\" (\"barley\" - Latin \"*hordeata\" < '). The Italian \"\", the French and English \"orgeat\" have the same origin, though the beverages themselves have diverged, and are generally no longer made from barley.\n\nVarious false etymologies exist – one legend links the origins of the name to James I of Aragon, who, after being given the drink for the first time by a local in Alboraya, was said to have exclaimed in Valencian, \"\" (\"That's gold, darling!\").\n\n\n"}
{"id": "627733", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=627733", "title": "Reis telephone", "text": "Reis telephone\n\nThe Reis telephone was an invention named after Philipp Reis of a telephonelike device he constructed. Reis's first successful work is dated to October 1861.\n\nIn 1861, Philipp Reis succeeded in creating a device that captured sound, converted it to electrical impulses which were transmitted via electrical wires to another device that transformed these pulses into recognizable sounds similar to the original acoustical source. Reis coined the term \"telephon\" to describe his device.\n\nIn 1862, Reis demonstrated his telephone to Wilhelm von Legat, Inspector of the Royal Prussian Telegraph Corps who produced an account of it (Legat, 1862), a translation of which was obtained by Thomas Edison in 1875 and which was used in Edison's successful development of the carbon microphone. The Legat account included drawings that are different from that below, suggesting that it is of a later version. Edison acknowledged his debt to Reis thus:\nThe first inventor of a telephone was Phillip Reis of Germany only musical not articulating. The first person to publicly exhibit a telephone for transmission of articulate speech was A. G. Bell. The first practical commercial telephone for transmission of articulate speech was invented by myself. Telephones used throughout the world are mine and Bell's. Mine is used for transmitting. Bell's is used for receiving. (Edison 2006, [LB020312 TAEM 83:170])\n\nHowever Reis's telephone was not limited to musical sounds. Reis also used his telephone to transmit the phrase \"Das Pferd frisst keinen Gurkensalat\" (The horse does not eat cucumber salad). Because this phrase is hard to understand acoustically in the German language, Reis used it to prove that speech can be successfully recognized on the distant end.\n\nAs Reis was considering his invention as a means of broadcasting music, he termed his microphone the 'singing station'. The Reis microphone was based on a horizontal parchment diaphragm as a sound transducer. The diaphragm was mounted on the top of a closed wooden sound box, with a speaking horn on the front. Sound received by the horn caused the diaphragm to vibrate. Above this were two brass strips, later with two platinum contacts, originally with a single platinum contact and the lower contact formed of a drop of mercury in a recess in the end of the screw. One strip was glued to the centre of the diaphragm; another strip, usually two strips in a V, was mounted above this. The strip's own weight gave a light pressure between the contacts.\n\nSound vibrations caused the diaphragm and lower contact to vibrate in sympathy. This changed the resistance between the two contacts, giving an electrical signal to the telephone line.\n\nThere was some question as to the operation of the microphone. It is regarded today as having varied the \"resistance\" of the contacts. However Reis' own description claimed that the contacts opened and closed. At the time, it was held that a circuit with such a 'make and break' circuit was incapable of transmitting intelligible speech. Reis' device had been used to transmit speech from 1861, and widely publicly demonstrated from 1863, yet when Bell's patent claim was set against Reis' primacy of inventing the telephone this 'inability' for it to work because of its use of a \"false theory\" was enough to (legally) portray Reis' invention as invalid, thus allowing Bell to claim novelty.\n\nReis's speaker worked by magnetostriction. In his first receiver he wound a coil of wire around an iron knitting needle and rested the needle against the F hole of a violin. As current passed through the needle, the iron \"shrank\" and a click was produced. The image, below, shows an advanced version where the iron bar is clamped to a cigar-box-shaped resonator. This receiver is not very sensitive. It produces weak sound but has good fidelity. It requires very high current and is a current-sensitive device rather than a voltage-sensitive device.\n\nThis instrument could transmit continuous musical tones but produced indistinct speech. In 1865, however, British scientist David E. Hughes used the Reis telephone with \"good results\".\n\n\n"}
{"id": "630046", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=630046", "title": "Lavash", "text": "Lavash\n\nLavash (; ; ; ; ) is a soft, thin unleavened flatbread made in a tandoor and eaten all over the South Caucasus, Western Asia and the areas surrounding the Caspian Sea. Lavash is one of the most widespread types of bread in Armenia, Azerbaijan, Iran and Turkey.\n\nIn 2014, \"Lavash, the preparation, meaning and appearance of traditional Armenian bread as an expression of culture\" was inscribed in the UNESCO Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity. In 2016, making and sharing flatbread (lavash, katyrma, jupka or yufka) in communities of Azerbaijan, Iran, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Turkey was inscribed on the list as well.\n\nSome modern food specialists claim that it originated in Armenia, whilst others state that it probably originated in the Middle East. According to Peter Reinhart, \"Lavash, though usually called Armenian flatbread, also has Iranian roots and is now eaten throughout the Middle East and around the world\". In 2014, Lavash was described by the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity as \"an expression of Armenian culture\". This decision led to protests in Azerbaijan, Iran, Kyrgyzstan, and Kazakhstan as they claimed that the food was \"regional\", not \"Armenian\".\n\nHrach Martirosyan tentatively connects Armenian լավաշ \"lavaš\" with dialectal լափ \"lapʿ\", լուփ \"lupʿ\", լովազ \"lovaz\" ‘palm, flat of the hand’, լափուկ \"lapʿuk\", լեփուկ \"lepʿuk\" ‘flat, polished stone for playing’, լավազ \"lavaz\" ‘very thin’ and assumes derivation from Proto-Armenian *\"law\"- ‘flat’. He remarks that semantically this is conceivable since this bread is specifically flat and thin. He then proceeds:\n\nLavash is made with flour, water, and salt. The thickness of the bread varies depending on how thin it was rolled out. Toasted sesame seeds and/or poppy seeds are sometimes sprinkled on before baking.\n\nTraditionally the dough is rolled out flat and slapped against the hot walls of a clay oven. While quite flexible when fresh, lavash dries out quickly and becomes brittle and hard. The soft form is easier to use when making wrap sandwiches; however, the dry form can be used for long-term storage (almost one year) and is used instead of leavened bread in Eucharist traditions by the Armenian Apostolic Church. In Armenian villages, the dried lavash is stacked high in layers to be used later, and when the time comes to rehydrate the bread, it is sprinkled with water to make it softer again. In its dry form, left-over lavash is used in Iran to make quick meals after being rehydrated with water, butter and cheese. In Armenia the dried bread is broken up into khash. In Armenia fresh lavash is used to wrap Khorovats and to make wraps with herbs and cheese. In Iran, Turkey and middle-east lavash is used with kebabs to make dürüm wraps. According to the Encyclopedia International, \"Common to all Armenians is their traditional unleavened bread, lavash, which is a staple in the Armenian diet.\"\n\nIn Sabirabad District of Azerbaijan after the wedding when the bride comes into her new house, her mother-in-law puts lavash on her shoulder and says: \"Let you come to the house of wealth, let your foot be lucky\". In the Novkhani settlement, after a funeral, it is customary for people to prepare \"kyulchya\", which sometimes consists of halva wrapped up in lavash.\n\nWomen baking lavash is a common theme that has inspired Armenian painters. One such portrait by the famous Soviet-era painter Minas Minassian is displayed at the National Museum of Art in Yerevan. A print of the painting \"Armenian Ladies Baking Lavash\" by Armenian American artist Manuel Tolegian was selected by U.S. President Gerald Ford to hang in the White House Bicentennial Collection. The weekend open-air arts-and-crafts market in downtown Yerevan offers many lavash-related paintings and handiworks, with renditions of happy women making lavash having become a common sight.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "632990", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=632990", "title": "Pranayama", "text": "Pranayama\n\nPrāṇāyāma is a Sanskrit word alternatively translated as \"extension of the \"prāṇa\" (breath or life force)\" or \"breath control.\" The word is composed from two Sanskrit words: \"prana\" meaning life force (noted particularly as the breath), and either \"ayama\" (to restrain or control the prana, implying a set of breathing techniques where the breath is intentionally altered in order to produce specific results) or the negative form \"ayāma\", meaning to extend or draw out (as in extension of the life force). It is a yogic discipline with origins in ancient India.\n\n\"Prāṇāyāma\" (Devanagari: \"\") is a Sanskrit compound.\n\nV. S. Apte provides fourteen different meanings for the word \"prāṇa\" (Devanagari: , \"\") including these:\n\n\nOf these meanings, the concept of \"vital air\" is used by Bhattacharyya to describe the concept as used in Sanskrit texts dealing with prāṇāyāma. Thomas McEvilley translates \"prāṇa\" as \"spirit-energy\". The breath is understood to be its most subtle material form, but is also believed to be present in the blood, and most concentrated in men's semen and women's vaginal fluid.\n\nMonier-Williams defines the compound ' as \"(m., also pl.) N. of the three 'breath-exercises' performed during (\"See\" ', ', '\". This technical definition refers to a particular system of breath control with three processes as explained by Bhattacharyya: ' (to take the breath inside), ' (to retain it), and \"\" (to discharge it). There are also other processes of prāṇāyāma in addition to this three-step model.\n\nMacdonell gives the etymology as ' + \"āyāma\" and defines it as \"\"m.\" suspension of breath (\"sts. pl.\")\".\n\nApte's definition of ' derives it from ' + ' and provides several variant meanings for it when used in compounds. The first three meanings have to do with \"length\", \"expansion, extension\", and \"stretching, extending\", but in the specific case of use in the compound ' he defines \"\" as meaning \"restrain, control, stopping\".\n\nAn alternative etymology for the compound is cited by Ramamurti Mishra, who says that:\n\nPrāṇāyāma is mentioned in verse 4.29 of the Bhagavad Gītā.\n\nAccording to Bhagavad-Gītā As It Is, \"prāṇāyāma\" is translated to \"trance induced by stopping all breathing\", also being made from the two separate Sanskrit words, \"prāṇa\" and \"āyām\".\n\nPranayama is the fourth \"limb\" of the eight limbs of Ashtanga Yoga mentioned in verse 2.29 in the Yoga Sutras of Patanjali. Patanjali, a Hindu Rishi, discusses his specific approach to pranayama in verses 2.49 through 2.51, and devotes verses 2.52 and 2.53 to explaining the benefits of the practice. Patanjali does not fully elucidate the nature of prana, and the theory and practice of pranayama seem to have undergone significant development after him. He presents pranayama as essentially an exercise that is preliminary to concentration, as do the earlier Buddhist texts.\n\nMany yoga teachers advise that pranayama should be part of an overall practice that includes the other limbs of Patanjali's Raja Yoga teachings, especially Yama, Niyama, and Asana.\n\nThe Indian tradition of Hatha Yoga makes use of various pranayama techniques. The 15th century Hatha Yoga Pradipika is a key text of this tradition and includes various forms of pranayama such as breath retention techniques termed Kumbhaka and various body locks (Bandha). Other forms of pranayama breathing include Ujjayi breath (\"Victorious Breath\"), Bhastrika (\"bellows breath\") and Kapalabhati (\"skull shining breath\").\n\nMany of these practices have become popular in Western forms of Yoga.\n\nAccording to the Pali Buddhist Canon, the Buddha prior to his enlightenment practiced a meditative technique which involved pressing the palate with the tongue and forcibly attempting to restrain the breath. This is described as both extremely painful and not conducive to enlightenment. According to the Buddhist scheme, breathing stops with the fourth jhana, though this is a side-effect of the technique and does not come about as the result of purposeful effort.\n\nThe Buddha did incorporate moderate modulation of the length of breath as part of the preliminary tetrad in the Anapanasati Sutta. Its use there is preparation for concentration. According to commentarial literature, this is appropriate for beginners.\n\nLater Indo-Tibetan developments in Buddhist pranayama which are similar to Hindu forms can be seen as early as the 11th century, in the Buddhist text titled the \"Amṛtasiddhi\", which teaches three bandhas for kumbakha.\n\nThese developments continued in Tibetan Buddhism which includes its own forms of pranayama exercises termed Tsa-lung (Skt: nadi-vayu) usually incorporated into a system of yogic practice such as Trul khor or into the full Tantric systems of various Buddhist Tantras such as the Six Yogas of Naropa of the Cakrasamvara tradition. Tibetan Buddhist breathing exercises such as the \"nine breathings of purification\" or the \"Ninefold Expulsion of Stale Vital Energy\" (\"rlung ro dgu shrugs\"), a form of alternate nostril breathing, commonly include visualizations.\n\nIn the Nyingma tradition of Dzogchen these practices are collected in the textual cycle known as \"The Oral Transmission of Vairotsana\" (\"Vai ro snyan brgyud\").\n\nSeveral researchers have reported that pranayama techniques are beneficial in treating a range of stress-related disorders. A Cochrane systematic review on the symptomatic relief of asthma by breathing exercises did not find a statistically significant improvement but did find that there was a statistically significant increase in the dose of histamine needed to provoke a 20% reduction in FEV1 (PD20) during pranayama breathing but not with the placebo device.\n\nAuthoritative texts on Yoga state that, in order to avoid injuries and unwanted side effects, pranayama should only be undertaken when one has a firmly established yoga practice and then only under the guidance of an experienced Guru. Although relatively safe, Hatha Yoga is not risk free. Sensible precautions can usefully be taken such as beginners should avoid advanced moves if they have any physical health related issue. It can get dangerous if someone is trying to pose tough exercise which requires extreme flexibility and good shapes of bones. Hatha Yoga should not be combined with psychoactive drug use, and competitive Hatha Yoga should be avoided. Person should inform the teacher or trainer of their physical limitations and concerns before getting involved themselves for extreme pose positions. Functional limitations should be taken into consideration. Modifications can then be made using props, altering the duration or poses.\n\nAccording to at least one study, pranayama was the yoga practice leading to most injuries, with four injuries in a study of 76 practitioners. There have been limited reports of adverse effects including haematoma and pneumothorax, though the connections are not always well established.\n"}
{"id": "633381", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=633381", "title": "Yodels", "text": "Yodels\n\nYodels are frosted, cream-filled cakes made by the Drake's company, which was bought by McKee Foods after former owner Old HB went bankrupt. Yodels are distributed on the East Coast of the United States. They are similar to Hostess Brands' Ho Hos and Little Debbie's Swiss Rolls.\n\nEach plastic package of Yodels contains two cakes, totaling 440 calories and three grams of saturated fat. Yodels are also sold in boxes containing five or eight individually wrapped pairs of cakes (a total of ten or 16). Formerly Yodels used a different formula, with thicker, denser cake and came packaged in foil. This was changed by the late 80s to the current recipe and packaging.\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "634071", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=634071", "title": "Fruitcake", "text": "Fruitcake\n\nFruitcake (or fruit cake or fruit bread) is a cake made with candied or dried fruit, nuts, and spices, and optionally soaked in spirits. In the United Kingdom, certain rich versions may be iced and decorated.\n\nFruitcakes are typically served in celebration of weddings and Christmas. Given their rich nature, fruitcakes are most often consumed on their own, as opposed to with condiments (such as butter or cream).\n\nThe earliest recipe from ancient Rome lists pomegranate seeds, pine nuts, and raisins that were mixed into barley mash. In the Middle Ages, honey, spices, and preserved fruits were added.\n\nFruitcakes soon proliferated all over Europe. Recipes varied greatly in different countries throughout the ages, depending on the available ingredients as well as (in some instances) church regulations forbidding the use of butter, regarding the observance of fast. Pope Innocent VIII (1432–1492) finally granted the use of butter, in a written permission known as the ‘Butter Letter' or \"Butterbrief\" in 1490, giving permission to Saxony to use milk and butter in the \"Stollen\" fruitcakes. \n\nStarting in the 16th century, sugar from the American Colonies (and the discovery that high concentrations of sugar could preserve fruits) created an excess of candied fruit, thus making fruitcakes more affordable and popular.\n\nIn Australia, fruitcake is consumed throughout the year, and is available at most major retail outlets. The cake is rarely eaten with icing or condiments.\n\nIn the Bahamas, not only is the fruitcake drenched with rum, but the ingredients are as well. All of the candied fruits, walnuts, and raisins are placed in an enclosed container and are soaked with the darkest variety of rum, anywhere from 2 weeks to 3 months in advance. The cake ingredients are mixed, and once the cake has finished baking, rum is poured onto it while it is still hot.\n\nIn Bulgaria, the common fruitcake is known as \"keks\" (, ), is home-made and is consumed throughout the year. Recipes for \"keks\" vary, but commonly it contains flour, butter and/or cooking oil, milk, yeast, yoghurt, eggs, cocoa, walnuts, and raisins. It is usually baked in Bundt-style pan.\n\nThere is also another specific type of fruitcake prepared for Easter, which is known as Kozunak (, ).\nThis fruitcake is known as pan de pascua. To learn more, go to Pan de Pascua\n\nThe fruitcake is commonly eaten during the Christmas season in Canada. Rarely is it seen during other times of the year. The Canadian fruitcake is similar in style to the UK version, as it is in most Commonwealth countries. However, there is rarely icing on the cake and alcohol is not commonly put in Christmas cakes that are sold. The cakes also tend to be devoid of any decorations and are shaped like a small loaf of bread.\n\nDark, moist and rich Christmas fruitcakes are the most frequently consumed, with white Christmas fruitcake rarely seen. These cakes tend to be made in mid-November to early December when the weather starts to cool down. They are a staple during Christmas dinner and a gift generally exchanged between business associates and close friends/family.\n\nIn France, as in some other non-English speaking countries, the \"gâteau aux fruits\" (\"fruit-cake\") is often simply called \"Cake\".\n\nIn Germany, baked goods that fit the description of fruitcake are not usually regarded as cake but rather as sweet breads. \n\n\"Stollen\" is loaf-shaped and often powdered with icing sugar on the outside. It is usually made with yeast, butter, water, and flour, with the addition of citrus zest, candied citrus peel, raisins, and almonds.\n\nThe most famous Stollen is the \"Dresdner Stollen\", sold at the Dresden Christmas market, the Striezelmarkt.\nOfficial \"Dresden Stollen\", produced by only 150 Dresden bakers, bears a special seal depicting Elector Augustus II the Strong.\n\nIn Bremen, the local fruitcake called Klaben is traditionally sold and eaten during the Christmas season. \"Bremer Klaben\" is a kind of Stollen which is not dusted with powdered sugar after baking. Both \"Dresdner Stollen\" and \"Bremen Klaben\" are protected geographical indications.\n\nIn Southern Germany and the Alpine region, \"Früchtebrot\" is a sweet, dark bread baked with nuts and dried fruit, e.g. apricots, figs, dates, plums.\n\nFruitcake is a rich dense cake packed with dry fruits and nuts flavoured with spices usually made during Christmas. In India, this is found everywhere during Christmas season, although it is also available commonly throughout the year.\n\nIn Ireland, a type of fruitcake called barmbrack is eaten at Hallowe'en. The cake contains different objects such as a ring or small coin, each signifying a different fortune for the person who finds it.\n\nPanforte is a chewy, dense Tuscan fruitcake dating back to 13th-century Siena. Panforte is strongly flavored with spices (Panforte means \"Strong-bread\") and baked in a shallow form. Genoa's fruitcake, a lower, denser but still crumbly variety, is called Pandolce (\"Sweet-bread\").\n\nPanettone is a Milanese sweet bread loaf (widely available throughout Italy and in many other countries) served around Christmas which is traditionally filled with dried and candied fruits, with a bread loaf consistency similar in texture to Irish barm brack.\n\nFruitcakes arrived in New Zealand with early settlers from Britain. Until the 1960s fruitcake was generally homemade, but since then they have become commercially widely available in a range of styles. Light coloured fruitcake is often sold as \"tennis cake\" or \"light fruit-cake\" all year round.\n\nMost New Zealand wedding cakes are finely iced and decorated fruitcake often several tiers high. Most fruitcake is eaten in the Christmas period. It is dark, rich and made from multiple dried fruit. Homemade cakes may use brandy or sherry to enhance flavour rather than as a preservative. They may be square or round, iced or uniced. A Christmas cake is usually simply decorated with a Christmas scene or the words Merry Christmas.\n\nIn addition to the European-style fruitcake, a traditional fruitcake commonly eaten during Christmas in the Philippines is the \"crema de fruta\". It is made with layers of sponge cake, sweet custard or whipped cream, gelatin or \"gulaman\" (agar), and various preserved or fresh fruits, including mangoes, pineapples, cherries, and strawberries. \n\nEasier-to-prepare icebox cake variants of \"crema de fruta\" use ladyfingers (\"broas\") instead of sponge cake layers. Mango float is a very popular modern adaptation of this dish. It uses graham crackers and ripe carabao mangoes (though other fruits can be used as well).\n\n\"Keks\" is a traditional fruitcake eaten during Christmas season. It is a loaf shaped sponge cake with a substantial content of nuts, raisins, figs and candied fruits.\n\nAlthough French in its origin, Bolo Rei is a traditional fruitcake enjoyed during Christmas season and a staple dessert in any Portuguese home during the holidays. Included is the characteristic fava bean and, according to tradition, whoever finds the fava bean has to pay for the cake next year.\n\nCozonac is a fruitcake mostly made for every major holiday (Christmas, Easter, New Year).\n\n\"\" is a cake made from figs, almonds or walnuts, and flavorings, similar to a panforte.\n\nBirnenbrot is a dense sweet Swiss fruitcake with candied fruits and nuts.\n\nCalled black cake, is a traditional part of Christmas celebration in the English Caribbean. The cake incorporates a large quantity of mixed fruits and rum/wine and becomes a treasured Christmas treat consumed and given out between the Christmas season and New Years'. The fruit, wine and rum is prepared weeks sometimes months ahead, and has its origin in the English Christmas pudding, and can be quite expensive. It is very different from a North American fruitcake. In Guyana, South America, the same cake with icing, as in the U.K becomes a wedding cake.\n\nIn the UK, fruitcakes come in many varieties, from extremely light to rich and moist. \n\nThe traditional Christmas cake is a round fruitcake covered in marzipan and then in white royal icing or fondant icing. They are often further decorated with snow scenes, holly leaves, and berries (real or artificial), or tiny decorative robins or snowmen. It is also the tradition for this kind of cake to be served at weddings as part of the dessert course.\n\nIn Yorkshire, it is often served accompanied with cheese. Fruitcakes in the United Kingdom often contain currants and glace cherries, an example of this type being the Genoa cake. One type of cake that originated in Scotland is the Dundee Cake, a type of fruitcake which does not contain glace cherries. This is a fruitcake that is decorated with almonds, and which owes its name to Keiller's marmalade.\n\nFruitcake was historically referred to as plum cake in England since around 1700.\n\nTypical American fruitcakes are rich in fruit and nuts.\n\nMail-order fruitcakes in America began in 1913. Some well-known American bakers of fruitcake include Collin Street Bakery in Corsicana, Texas, and The Claxton Bakery in Claxton, Georgia. Both Collin Street and Claxton are Southern companies with inexpensive access to large nut quantities, for which the expression \"nutty as a fruitcake\" was derived in 1935. Commercial fruitcakes are often sold from catalogs by charities as a fund raiser.\n\nMost American mass-produced fruitcakes are alcohol-free, but traditional recipes are saturated with liqueurs or brandy and covered in powdered sugar, both of which prevent mold. Brandy (or wine) soaked linens can be used to store the fruitcakes, and some people feel that fruitcakes improve with age.\n\nIn the United States, the fruitcake has become a ridiculed dessert, in part due to the mass-produced inexpensive cakes of questionable age. Some attribute the beginning of this trend with \"The Tonight Show\" host Johnny Carson. He would joke that there really is only one fruitcake in the world, passed from family to family. After Carson's death, the tradition continued with \"The Fruitcake Lady\" (Marie Rudisill), who made appearances on the show and offered her \"fruitcake\" opinions. In fact, the fruitcake had been a butt of jokes on television programs such as \"Father Knows Best\" and \"The Donna Reed Show\" years before \"The Tonight Show\" debuted and appears to have first become a vilified confection in the early 20th century, as evidenced by Warner Brothers cartoons.\n\nSince 1995, Manitou Springs, Colorado, has hosted the Great Fruitcake Toss on the first Saturday of every January. \"We encourage the use of recycled fruitcakes,\" says Leslie Lewis of the Manitou Springs Chamber of Commerce. The all-time Great Fruitcake Toss record is 1,420 feet, set in January 2007 by a group of eight Boeing engineers who built the \"Omega 380,\" a mock artillery piece fueled by compressed air pumped by an exercise bike.\n\nWhen a fruitcake contains a good deal of alcohol, it can remain edible for many years. For example, a fruitcake baked in 1878 was kept as an heirloom by a family (Morgan L. Ford) in Tecumseh, Michigan. In 2003 it was sampled by Jay Leno on \"The Tonight Show\". Wrapping the cake in alcohol-soaked linen before storing is one method of lengthening its shelf life.\n\nA 106-year-old fruitcake discovered in 2017 by the Antarctic Heritage Trust was described as in \"excellent condition\" and \"almost\" edible.\n"}
{"id": "634940", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=634940", "title": "Butterscotch", "text": "Butterscotch\n\nButterscotch is a type of confectionery whose primary ingredients are brown sugar and butter, but other ingredients are part of some recipes, such as corn syrup, cream, vanilla, and salt. The earliest known recipes, in mid-19th century Yorkshire, used treacle (molasses) in place of or in addition to sugar.\n\nButterscotch is similar to toffee, but for butterscotch, the sugar is boiled to the soft crack stage, not hard crack as with toffee. Often credited with their invention, Parkinson's of Doncaster made butterscotch boiled sweets and sold them in tins, which became one of the town's best known exports. They became famous in 1851 when Queen Victoria was presented with a tin when she visited the town. Butterscotch sauce, made of butterscotch and cream, is used as a topping for ice cream (particularly sundaes).\n\nThe term \"butterscotch\" is also often used more specifically of the flavour of brown sugar and butter together even if the actual confection butterscotch is not involved, such as in butterscotch pudding.\n\nFood historians have several theories regarding the name and origin of this confectionery, but none are conclusive. One explanation is the meaning \"to cut or score\" for the word \"scotch\", as the confection must be cut into pieces, or \"scotched\", before hardening. Another idea is that it came from association with Scotland. It is also possible that the \"scotch\" part of its name was derived from the word \"scorch\". In 1855, F. K. Robinson's \"Glossary of Yorkshire Words\" explained Butterscotch as \"a treacle ball with an amalgamation of butter in it\".\n\nEarly mentions of butterscotch associate the confection with Doncaster in Yorkshire. An 1848 issue of the \"Liverpool Mercury\" gave a recipe for \"Doncaster butterscotch\" as \"one pound of butter, one pound of sugar and a quarter of a pound of treacle, boiled together\" ( each of butter and sugar and treacle).\n\nBy 1851, Doncaster butterscotch was sold commercially by rival confectioners S. Parkinson & Sons (still trading as Parkinson's), Henry Hall, and Booth's, all of Doncaster, via agents elsewhere in Yorkshire. Parkinson's started to use and advertise the Doncaster Church as their trademark. It was advertised as \"Royal Doncaster Butterscotch\", or \"The Queen's Sweetmeat\", and said to be \"the best emollient for the chest in the winter season\". Parkinson's Butterscotch was by appointment to the royal household and was presented to the Princess Elizabeth, then the Duchess of Edinburgh, in 1948 and to Anne, Princess Royal in 2007. In the late 19th and early 20th century the British sweet became popular in the U.S.\n\nButterscotch is often used as a flavour for items such as dessert sauce, pudding, and cookies (biscuits) . To that end, it can be bought in \"butterscotch chips\", made with hydrogenated (solid) fats so as to be similar for baking use to chocolate chips.\nThere are also individually wrapped, translucent yellow hard candies (butterscotch disks) with an artificial butterscotch flavour, which is dissimilar to actual butterscotch. In addition, butterscotch flavoured liqueur is in production.\n\nButterscotch sauce is made of brown sugar cooked to mixed with butter and cream.\n\n"}
{"id": "635255", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=635255", "title": "Milk toast", "text": "Milk toast\n\nMilk toast is a breakfast food consisting of toasted bread in warm milk, typically with sugar and butter. Salt, pepper, paprika, cinnamon, cocoa, raisins and other ingredients may be added. In the New England region of the United States, milk toast refers to toast that has been dipped in a milk-based white sauce. Milk toast was a popular food throughout the late 19th and early 20th centuries, especially for young children and for the convalescent, for whom the food was thought to be soothing and easy to digest. Although not as popular in the 2000s, milk toast is still considered a comfort food.\n\nThe food writer M. F. K. Fisher (1908–1992) called milk toast a \"warm, mild, soothing thing, full of innocent strength\", and wrote, of eating milk toast in a famed restaurant with a convalescent friend, that the food was \"a small modern miracle of gastronomy\". She notes that her homeliest kitchen manuals even list it under \"Feeding The Sick\" or \"Invalid Recipes\", arguing that milk toast was \"an instinctive palliative, something like boiled water\". Fisher also notes that for true comfort, a ritual may be necessary, and for \"Milk Toast people\", the dish used may be foolishly important. Her favorite version of milk toast has the milk mixed 50/50 with Campbell's condensed cream of tomato soup in a wide-lipped pitcher called a \"boccalino\" in Italian Switzerland where she got it.\n\nMilk toast is a dessert that is served in many Asian milk tea cafes. It consists of thick, enriched toasted white bread with condensed milk on top.\n\n\"Masonica\", or \"popara\", is a dessert similar to milk toast which can be served at any time of the day. It is often made with fresh warm milk and day-old bread.\n\nA traditional Scandinavian dish similar to milk toast is called \"soll\" in Norwegian and \"bryta\" in Swedish. It consists of broken \"flatbrød\" (wafer-thin, crisp bread), \"tunnbröd\" or dry bread served in a bowl of cold milk (often \"filmjölk\") and sweetened with sugar etc. \"Soll\" was an everyday dish for peasants in the countryside, especially served as a simple supper in the evening. During the winter \"soll\" was sometimes served as breakfast with warmed milk.\n\nIn New Mexican cuisine, milk toast is referred to as leche cocida, meaning cooked milk. Toasted bread is torn into chunks and placed in a bowl. Milk is cooked with a small amount of butter, salt and pepper and is poured over the bread. It is a meal associated with using up excess milk, perhaps from the days of milk man service.\n\nMilk toast's soft blandness served as inspiration for the name of the timid and ineffectual comic strip character Caspar Milquetoast, drawn by H. T. Webster from 1924 to 1952. Thus, the term \"milquetoast\" entered the language as the label for a timid, shrinking, apologetic person. Milk toast also appeared in Disney's \"Follow Me, Boys!\" as an undesirable breakfast for the aging main character, Lem Siddons.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "636635", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=636635", "title": "Four-leaf clover", "text": "Four-leaf clover\n\nThe four-leaf clover is a rare variation of the common three-leaf clover. According to traditional superstition, such clovers bring good luck, though it is not clear when or how that superstition got started. The earliest mention of \"Fower-leafed or purple grasse\" is from 1640 and simply says that it was kept in gardens because it was \"good for the purples in children or others\". A description from 1869 says that four-leaf clovers were \"gathered at night-time during the full moon by sorceresses, who mixed it with vervain and other ingredients, while young girls in search of a token of perfect happiness made quest of the plant by day\". The first reference to luck might be from an 11-year-old girl, who wrote in an 1877 letter to \"St. Nicholas Magazine\", \"Did the fairies ever whisper in your ear, that a four-leaf clover brought good luck to the finder?\"\n\nIt is claimed that there are approximately 10,000 three-leaf clovers for every four-leaf clover. However, an actual survey of over 5 million clovers found the real frequency to be closer to 5,000 to 1, twice the said probability.\n\nEven so, this probability has not deterred collectors who have reached records as high as 170,000 four-leaf clovers in a lifetime. However, the world record for four-leaf clovers in a single day is at least 166, with the record for one hour being 166, set by an American named Katie Borka on June 23, 2018. \n\nClovers can have more than four leaves. Five-leaf clovers are less commonly found naturally than four-leaf clovers; however, they, too, have been successfully cultivated. Some four-leaf clover collectors, particularly in Ireland, regard the five-leaf clover, known as a rose clover, as a particular prize. In exceptionally rare cases, clovers are able to grow with and more in nature. The most leaves ever found on a single clover stem (\"Trifolium repens L\".) is 56 and was discovered by Shigeo Obara of Hanamaki City, Iwate, Japan, on 10 May 2009.\n\nIt is debated whether the fourth leaf is caused genetically or environmentally. Its relative rarity (1 in 5,000 clovers) suggests a possible recessive gene appearing at a low frequency. Alternatively, four-leaf clovers could be caused by somatic mutation or a developmental error of environmental causes. They could also be caused by the interaction of several genes that happen to segregate in the individual plant. It is possible all four explanations could apply to individual cases. This means that multiple four-leaf clovers could be found in the same clover plant.\n\nResearchers from the University of Georgia have reported finding the gene that turns ordinary three-leaf clovers into the coveted four-leaf types. Masked by the three-leaf gene and strongly influenced by environmental condition, molecular markers now make it possible to detect the presence of the gene for four-leaves and for breeders to work with it. The results of the study, which also located two other leaf traits in the white-clover genome, were reported in the July/August 2010 edition of \"Crop Science\", published by the Crop Science Society of America.\n\nThe other leaf traits, the red fleck mark and red midrib, a herringbone pattern that runs down the center of each leaflet in a bold red color, were mapped to nearby locations, resolving a century-old question as to whether these leaf traits were controlled by one gene or two separate genes.\n\nWhite clover has many genes that affect leaf color and shape, and the three in the study were very rare. These traits can be quite attractive, particularly if combined with others, and can turn clover into an ornamental plant for use in flower beds.\n\nThere are reports of farms in the US which specialize in four-leaf clovers, producing as many as 10,000 a day (to be sealed in plastic as \"lucky charms\") by introducing a genetically engineered ingredient to the plants to encourage the aberration (there are, however, widely available cultivars that regularly produce leaves with multiple leaflets – see below). \n\nThere are some cultivars of white clover (\"Trifolium repens\") which regularly produce more than three leaflets, including purple-leaved \"T. repens\" \"Purpurascens Quadrifolium\" and green-leaved \"T. repens\" \"Quadrifolium\". Some clovers have more spade shape leaves, rather than the usual rounded ones. This may be another plant, or another genetic mutation. Some genetic mutations in clovers include spade-like shaped leaves or a dotted rusty colour on the leaves.\n\n\"Trifolium repens\" \"Good Luck\" is a cultivar which has three, four, or five green, dark-centered leaflets per leaf.\n\nOther plants may be mistaken for, or misleadingly sold as, \"four-leaf clovers\"; for example, \"Oxalis tetraphylla\" is a species of wood sorrel with leaves resembling a four-leaf clover. Other species that have been sold as \"four-leaf clovers\" include \"Marsilea quadrifolia\".\n\n\nSome folk traditions assign a different attribute to each leaf of a clover. The first leaf represents hope, the second stands for faith, the third is for love and the fourth leaf brings luck to the finder. A fifth leaf represents money, but there is no meaning as yet for the sixth leaf and above. Some reports claim six to be fame and seven to be longevity, though the notions' origination is unknown.\nOthers say that four-leaf clovers granted the power to see fairies, or that they are related to St. Patrick's use of the shamrock to explain Christianity to the Irish §https://www.thebalanceeveryday.com/interesting-4-leaf-clover-facts-4117192\n\n\n"}
{"id": "637186", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=637186", "title": "Granola", "text": "Granola\n\nGranola is a breakfast food and snack food consisting of rolled oats, nuts, honey or other sweeteners such as brown sugar, and sometimes puffed rice, that is usually baked until it is crisp, toasted and golden brown. During the baking process, the mixture is stirred to maintain a loose breakfast cereal consistency. Dried fruit, such as raisins and dates, and confections such as chocolate are sometimes added. Granola, particularly if it includes flax seeds, is often used to improve digestion. Granola is often eaten in combination with yogurt, honey, fresh fruit (such as bananas, strawberries or blueberries), milk or other forms of cereal. It also serves as a topping for various pastries, desserts or ice cream.\n\nGranola is carried by people who are hiking, camping, or backpacking because it is nutritious, lightweight, high in calories, and easy to store (properties that make it similar to trail mix and muesli). As a snack, it is often combined with honey or corn syrup and condensed into a bar form that makes it easy to carry for packed lunches, hiking, or other outdoor activities.\n\nThe names \"Granula\" and \"Granola\" were registered trademarks in the late 19th century United States for foods consisting of whole grain products crumbled and then baked until crisp, in contrast to the, at that time (about 1900), contemporary invention, muesli, which is traditionally neither baked nor sweetened. The name is now a trademark only in Australia and New Zealand, but is still more commonly referred to as muesli there. The trademark is owned by the Australian Health & Nutrition Association Ltd.'s Sanitarium Health Food Company in Australia and Australasian Conference Association Limited in New Zealand.\n\nGranula was invented in Dansville, New York, by Dr. James Caleb Jackson at the Jackson Sanitarium in 1863. The Jackson Sanitarium was a prominent health spa that operated into the early 20th century on the hillside overlooking Dansville. It was also known as Our Home on the Hillside; thus the company formed to sell Jackson's cereal was known as the Our Home Granula Company. Granula was composed of Graham flour and was similar to an oversized form of Grape-Nuts. A similar cereal was developed by John Harvey Kellogg. It too was initially known as Granula, but the name was changed to Granola to avoid legal problems with Jackson.\n\nThe food and name were revived in the 1960s, and fruits and nuts were added to it to make it a health food that was popular with the health and nature-oriented hippie movement. At the time, several people claim to have revived or re-invented granola. A major promoter was Layton Gentry, profiled in \"Time\" as \"Johnny Granola-Seed\". In 1964, Gentry sold the rights to a granola recipe using oats, which he claimed to have invented himself, to Sovex Natural Foods for $3,000. The company was founded in 1953 in Holly, Michigan by the Hurlinger family with the main purpose of producing a concentrated paste of brewers yeast and soy sauce known as \"Sovex\". Earlier in 1964, it had been bought by John Goodbrad and moved to Collegedale, Tennessee. In 1967, Gentry bought back the rights for west of the Rockies for $1,500 and then sold the west coast rights to Wayne Schlotthauer of Lassen Foods in Chico, California, for $18,000. Lassen was founded from a health food bakery run by Schlotthauer's father-in-law. Canadian rights were ceded in 1972 to the Congregation Shalom Ba-olam, a charitable organization which produced \"Layton Gentry's Original Crunchy Granola\" as a fundraiser. Oro Foods from Ontario also produced granola from the same recipe, but fell out with Gentry. The Hurlingers, Goodbrads, and Schlotthauers were all Adventists, and it is possible that Gentry was a lapsed Adventist who was familiar with the earlier granola.\n\nIn 1972, an executive at Pet Milk (later Pet Incorporated) of St. Louis, Missouri, introduced Heartland Natural Cereal, the first major commercial granola. At almost the same time, Quaker introduced Quaker 100% Natural Granola. Quaker was threatened with legal action by Gentry, and they subsequently changed the name of their product to Harvest Crunch. Within a year, Kellogg's had introduced its \"Country Morning\" granola cereal and General Mills had introduced its \"Nature Valley\". In 1974, McKee Baking (later McKee Foods), makers of Little Debbie snack cakes, purchased Sovex. In 1998, the company also acquired the Heartland brand and moved its manufacturing to Collegedale. In 2004, Sovex's name was changed to \"Blue Planet Foods\".\n\n\"Granola bars\" have become popular as a snack, similar to the traditional flapjack (oat bar) or muesli bar familiar in the Commonwealth countries. Granola bars consist of granola mixed with honey or other sweetened syrup, pressed and baked into a bar shape, resulting in the production of a more convenient snack. Granola bars are always individually packaged in a sealed pouch, even when a box of multiple bars is purchased. This enables people to place the packaged bar in a purse, backpack or other bag for consumption at a later point. The product is most popular in the United States and Canada, Australia and New Zealand, the United Kingdom, parts of southern Europe, Brazil, Israel, South Africa and Japan. Recently, granola has begun to expand its market into India and other southeast Asian countries. A wide variety of flavours is available, ranging from fruit and nuts to chocolate and marshmallows. Some granola bars are coated in chocolate or vanilla yogurt topping.\n\nJayne Hurley, a senior nutritionist who works for the Center for Science in the Public Interest, states that granola bars are \"...not health food\"; \"[t]hey're basically cookies masquerading as health food.\" According to \"The Globe and Mail\", a \"46-gram package of peanut butter Nature Valley [granola] bars contains 230 calories, 11 grams of fat, 150 milligrams of sodium and 11 grams of sugar\"; in comparison, \"a 45-gram Kit Kat chocolate bar, ...contains 230 calories, 12 grams of fat, 35 milligrams of sodium and 22 grams of sugar.\n\nMatzo granola is a Jewish breakfast eaten during the festival of Pesach. It is made by basically the same method as oat-based granola, with broken up matzo pieces in place of oats. Many variations are possible.\n\nA Superfood granola is a modern take on the traditional granola that purports to use only nutrient-dense ingredients that may provide some sort of health benefit. Although a Superfood granola can be made using the same method as oat-based granola, they tend to be marketed as grain-free, gluten-free and low-glycemic. Of course, different variations are possible.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "637791", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=637791", "title": "Buccellato", "text": "Buccellato\n\nA Buccellato is a Sicilian circular cake. Buccellato contains figs and nuts. It is traditionally associated with Christmas in Sicily.\n\nIt is not to be confused with the distinct, but similar traditional Lucchese cake of the same name, the buccellato (di Lucca), although both are ring-shaped sweet breads that contain candied fruit peels.\n\n"}
{"id": "639695", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=639695", "title": "York Peppermint Pattie", "text": "York Peppermint Pattie\n\nYork Peppermint Pattie is a dark chocolate enrobed peppermint confection produced by The Hershey Company.\n\nIt was first produced in York, Pennsylvania, by Henry Kessler at his York Cone Company in 1940, for sale in the Northeastern United States, Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, and Florida. In 1972, the York Cone Company was acquired by Peter Paul, which launched the York Peppermint Pattie nationally in 1975.\n\nIn 1978, Peter Paul merged with Cadbury. York passed to the Hershey Foods Corporation when it acquired the US operations of Cadbury Schweppes in 1988.\n\nDuring the 1970s and continuing in the present, Peter Paul launched a memorable advertising campaign for the candy with the tagline \"Get the Sensation\".\n\nThe confectionery features strongly contrasting flavors, with a particularly bitter chocolate coating around a sugar center. A sugar-free version of the candy is also available.\n\nMany chocolate-covered peppermints had been made before the York Peppermint Pattie came on the market, but Kessler's version was firm and crisp, while the competition was soft and gooey. A former employee and York resident Phil Kollin remembered the final (sample) test the pattie went through before it left the factory. \"It was a snap test. If the candy didn't break clean in the middle, it was a second.\"\n\nIn 2009, production of the York Peppermint Pattie moved from Reading, Pennsylvania, to Mexico.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "640174", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=640174", "title": "Avgolemono", "text": "Avgolemono\n\nAvgolemono, avgolémono (from ) or egg-lemon sauce, is a family of sauces and soups made with egg yolk and lemon juice mixed with broth, heated until they thicken. They are found in Greek, Turkish, Arab, Sephardic Jewish, Balkan, and Italian cuisine.\n\nIn Sephardic Jewish cuisine – which possibly invented it –, it is called agristada or salsa blanco, and in Italian cuisine, bagna brusca, brodettato, or brodo brusco. In Arabic, it is called tarbiya or \"beida bi-lemoune\" 'egg with lemon'; and in Turkish terbiye. It is also widely used in Balkan cuisine.\n\nAs a sauce, it is used for warm dolma, for vegetables like artichokes, and for stew-like dishes where the egg-lemon mixture is used to thicken the cooking juices, such as the Greek pork with celery and the Turkish \"ekşili köfte\". In some Middle Eastern cuisines, it is used as a sauce for chicken or fish. Among Italian Jews, it is served as a sauce for pasta or meat.\n\nAs a soup, it usually starts with chicken broth, tough meat (usually lamb), fish, or vegetable broths are also used. Typically, rice, orzo, pastina, or tapioca are cooked in the broth before the mixture of eggs and lemon is added. Its consistency varies from near-stew to near-broth. It is often served with pieces of the meat and vegetables reserved from the broth. Magiritsa soup is a Greek avgolemono soup of lamb offal served to break the fast of Great Lent.\n\nThe soup is usually made with whole eggs; sometimes with just yolks. The whites may be beaten into a foam separately before mixing with the yolks and lemon juice, or whole eggs may be beaten with the lemon juice. The starch of the pasta or rice contributes to stabilizing the emulsion.\n\nEgg-lemon sauce may originally be a Jewish dish. \"Agristada\" was made by Jews in Iberia before the expulsion from Spain with verjuice, pomegranate juice, or bitter orange juice, but not vinegar. In later periods, lemon became the standard souring agent.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "641274", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=641274", "title": "Raw foodism", "text": "Raw foodism\n\nRaw foodism, also known as rawism or following a raw food diet, is the dietary practice of eating only or mostly food that is uncooked and unprocessed. Depending on the philosophy, or type of lifestyle and results desired, raw food diets may include a selection of fruits, vegetables, nuts, seeds, eggs, fish, meat, and dairy products. The diet may also include simply processed foods, such as various types of sprouted seeds, cheese, and fermented foods such as yogurts, kefir, kombucha, or sauerkraut, but generally not foods that have been pasteurized, homogenized, or produced with the use of synthetic pesticides, fertilizers, solvents, and food additives.\n\nRaw food diets are diets composed entirely or mostly of food that is uncooked or that is cooked at low temperatures.\n\nA raw vegan diet consists of unprocessed, raw plant foods that have not been heated above . Typical foods included in raw food diets are fruits, vegetables, nuts, seeds, and sprouted grains and legumes.\n\nAmong raw vegans are subgroups, such as fruitarians, juicearians, or sproutarians. Fruitarians eat primarily or exclusively fruits, berries, seeds, and nuts. Juicearians process their raw plant foods into juice. Sproutarians adhere to a diet consisting mainly of sprouted seeds.\n\nIncluded in raw animal food diets are any food that can be eaten raw, such as uncooked, unprocessed raw muscle-meats/organ-meats/eggs, raw dairy, and aged, raw animal foods such as century eggs, fermented meat/fish/shellfish/kefir, as well as vegetables/fruits/nuts/sprouts/honey, but in general \"not\" raw grains, raw beans, and raw soy. Raw foods included on such diets have not been heated above . \n\nExamples of raw animal food diets include the Primal Diet, anopsology (otherwise known as \"Instinctive Eating\" or \"Instincto\"), and the Raw Paleolithic diet (otherwise known as the \"Raw Meat Diet\").\nThe Primal Diet consists of fatty meats, organ meats, dairy, honey, minimal fruit and vegetable juices, and coconut products, all raw, whereas the \"Raw, Paleolithic Diet\", is a raw version of the (cooked) Paleolithic Diet, incorporating large amounts of raw animal foods such as meats/organ-meats, seafood, eggs, and some raw plant-foods, but usually avoiding non-Paleo foods such as raw dairy, grains, and legumes.\n\nA number of traditional aboriginal diets consisted of large quantities of raw meats, organ meats, and berries, including the traditional diet of the Nenets tribe of Siberia and the Inuit people.\n\nContemporary raw food diets were first developed in Switzerland by Maximilian Bircher-Benner (1867 – 1939), who was influenced as a young man by the German \"Lebensreform\" movement, which saw civilization as corrupt and sought to go \"back to nature\"; it embraced holistic medicine, nudism, free love, exercise and other outdoors activity, and foods that it judged were more \"natural\". Bircher-Benner eventually adopted a vegetarian diet, but took that further and decided that raw food was what humans were really meant to eat; he was influenced by Charles Darwin's ideas that humans were just another kind of animal and Bircher-Benner noted that other animals do not cook their food. In 1904 he opened a sanatorium in the mountains outside of Zurich called \"Lebendinge Kraft\" or \"Vital Force,\" a technical term in the Lebensreform movement that referred especially to sunlight; he and others believed that this energy was more \"concentrated\" in plants than in meat, and was diminished by cooking. Patients in the clinic were fed raw foods, including muesli, which was created there. These ideas were influential to Ann Wigmore a notable raw food advocate but were dismissed by scientists and the medical profession as quackery.\n\nOne of the earliest books to advocate raw foodism was Eugene Christian's \"Uncooked Foods and How to Use Them\", 1904. Other proponents from the early part of the twentieth century include Californian fruit grower Otto Carque (author of \"The Foundation of All Reform\", 1904), George Julius Drews (author of \"Unfired Food and Trophotherapy\", 1912), Bernarr Macfadden and Herbert Shelton. Drews influenced John and Vera Richter to open America's first raw food restaurant \"The Eutropheon\" in 1917.\n\nShelton was arrested, jailed, and fined numerous times for practicing medicine without a license during his career as an advocate of rawism and other alternative health and diet philosophies. Shelton's legacy, as popularized by books like \"Fit for Life\" by Harvey and Marilyn Diamond, has been deemed \"pseudonutrition\" by the National Council Against Health Fraud.\n\nIn the 1970s, Norman W. Walker (inventor of the Norwalk Juicing Press) popularized raw food dieting. Leslie Kenton's book \"Raw Energy - Eat Your Way to Radiant Health\", published in 1984, added popularity to foods such as sprouts, seeds, and fresh vegetable juices. The book advocates a diet of 75% raw food, which it claims will prevent degenerative diseases, slow the effects of aging, provide enhanced energy, and boost emotional balance; it cites examples such as the sprouted-seed-enriched diets of the long-lived Hunza people and Gerson therapy, an unhealthy, dangerous and potentially very harmful raw juice-based diet and detoxification regime claimed to treat cancer.\n\nClaims held by raw food proponents include:\n\nA raw food diet is likely to impair the development of children and infants. Care is required in planning a raw vegan diet, especially for children, as there may not be enough vitamin B, vitamin D, and calories for a growing child on a totally raw vegan diet. Fuhrman fed his own four children raw and cooked vegetables, fruits, nuts, grains, beans, and occasionally eggs.\n\nFood poisoning is a health risk for all people eating raw foods, and increased demand for raw foods is associated with greater incidence of foodborne illness, especially for raw meat, fish, and shellfish. Outbreaks of gastroenteritis among consumers of raw and undercooked animal products (including smoked, pickled or dried animal products) are well-documented, and include raw meat, raw organ meat, raw fish (whether ocean-going or freshwater), shellfish, raw milk and products made from raw milk, and raw eggs.\n\nStudies have associated raw food dieting with loss of body weight and low bone mass.\n\nOne review stated that \"Many raw foods are toxic and only become safe after they have been cooked. Some raw foods contain substances that destroy vitamins, interfere with digestive enzymes or damage the walls of the intestine. Raw meat can be contaminated with bacteria which would be destroyed by cooking; raw fish can contain substances that interfere with vitamin B1 (anti-thiaminases)\"\n\nRichard Wrangham, professor of biological anthropology at Harvard University, proposes that cooked food played a pivotal role in human evolution. Evidence of a cooked diet, according to Wrangham, can be seen as far back as 1.8 million years ago in the anatomical adaptations of \"Homo erectus\". Reduction in the size of teeth and jaw in \"H. erectus\" indicate a softer diet, requiring less chewing time. This combined with a smaller gut and larger brain indicate to Wrangham that \"H. erectus\" was eating a higher quality diet than its predecessors. To explain a decreased gut providing the amount of energy required for an increased brain size, Wrangham links his research on the digestive effects of cooked versus raw foods with the lower reproductive abilities of female raw foodists, and BMI in both sexes, to support his hypothesis that cooked starches provided the energy necessary to fuel evolution from \"H. erectus\" to \"H. sapiens\".\n\nTheories opposed to Wrangham's include that of Leslie Aiello, professor of biological anthropology at University College London, and physiologist Peter Wheeler. Aiello and Wheeler believe it was soft animal foods, including bone marrow and brains, which contributed to humans developing the characteristics Wrangham attributes to cooked foods. Further, archaeological evidence suggests that cooking fires began in earnest only around 250 kya, when ancient hearths, earth ovens, burnt animal bones, and flint appear regularly across Europe and the Middle East. Two million years ago, the only sign of fire is burnt earth with human remains, which many anthropologists consider coincidence rather than evidence of intentional fire. Many anthropologists believe the increases in human brain-size occurred well before the advent of cooking, due to a shift away from the consumption of nuts and berries to the consumption of raw meat.\n\n"}
{"id": "641560", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=641560", "title": "Caesar (cocktail)", "text": "Caesar (cocktail)\n\nA Caesar (also known as a Bloody Caesar) is a cocktail created and primarily consumed in Canada. It typically contains vodka, a caesar mix (a blend of tomato juice and clam broth), hot sauce, and Worcestershire sauce, and is served with ice in a large, celery salt-rimmed glass, typically garnished with a stalk of celery and wedge of lime. What distinguishes it from a Bloody Mary is the inclusion of clam broth. The cocktail may also be contrasted with the Michelada, which has similar flavouring ingredients but uses beer instead of vodka.\n\nIt was invented in Calgary, Alberta, in 1969 by restaurateur Walter Chell to celebrate the opening of a new Italian restaurant in the city. It quickly became a popular mixed drink within Canada where over 350 million Caesars are consumed annually and it has inspired numerous variants.\n\nThe original cocktail of vodka with seasoned tomato and clam juice made its debut at the Polonaise nightclub in Manhattan in November 1953. The drink was introduced as the \"Smirnoff Smiler\" by owner Paul Pawlowski. In December 1953 columnist Walter Winchell reported that the drink was seasoned with \"a dash of Wooooshhhtasheer Sauce\". \n\nIn 1959, cartoonist and creator of \"The Addams family\", Charles Addams (employed by the New Yorker magazine, a few blocks from the Polonaise nightclub in Manhattan) claimed he invented the \"Gravel Gertie\", a cocktail of clam/tomato juice and vodka seasoned with tobasco sauce. \n\nIn 1962, Carl La Marca, bar manager at the Baker Hotel in Dallas, invented the \"Imperial Clam Digger\", adding a basil garnish and dash of lime to an existing version of the \"Smirnoff Smiler\", called the \"Clam Digger\". \n\nIn October, 1968, Seagram president Victor Fischel and Mott's Clamato marketer Ray Anrig claimed to have invented the seasoned tomato/clam/vodka cocktail, the \"Clamdigger\" earlier in 1968, in Manhattan. Seagram, headquartered 2 blocks from the Polonaise nightclub, filed to patent the name \"clamdigger\" claiming first use on May 31, 1968. From late 1968 to the end of 1969, Seagram and Mott's ran a major advertising promotion of the \"Clam Digger\" cocktail recipe in national magazines. \n\nThe Caesar was invented in 1969 by restaurant manager Walter Chell of the Calgary Inn (today the Westin Hotel) in Calgary, Alberta, Canada. He devised the cocktail after being tasked to create a signature drink for the Calgary Inn's new Italian restaurant. He mixed vodka with clam and tomato juice, Worcestershire sauce, and other spices, creating a drink similar to a Bloody Mary but with a uniquely spicy flavour.\n\nChell said his inspiration came from Italy. He recalled that in Venice, they served Spaghetti alle vongole, spaghetti with tomato sauce and clams. He reasoned that the mixture of clams and tomato sauce would make a good drink, and mashed clams to form a \"nectar\" that he mixed with other ingredients.\n\nAccording to Chell's granddaughter, his Italian ancestry led him to call the drink a \"Caesar\". The longer name of \"Bloody Caesar\" is said to differentiate the drink from the Bloody Mary, but Chell said it was a regular patron at the bar who served as the inspiration. During the three months he spent working to perfect the drink, he had customers sample it and offer feedback. One regular customer, an Englishman, who often ordered the drink said one day \"Walter, that's a damn good bloody Caesar\".\n\nChell said the drink was an immediate hit with the restaurant's patrons, claiming it \"took off like a rocket\". Within five years of its introduction, the Caesar had become Calgary's most popular mixed drink. It spread throughout Western Canada, then to the east. Coinciding with its 40th anniversary, a petition was launched in 2009 in the hopes of having the Caesar named the nation's official mixed drink. In Calgary, Mayor Dave Bronconnier celebrated the drink's anniversary by declaring May 13, 2009, as Caesar Day in the city.\n\nThe Mott's company was independently developing Clamato, a mixture of clam and tomato juices, at the same time the Caesar was invented. Sales of Clamato were initially slow: Mott's sold only 500 cases of Clamato in 1970, but sales consistently increased after the company's distributors discovered Chell's drink. By 1994, 70% of Mott's Clamato sales in Canada were made to mix Caesars, while half of all Clamato sales were made in Western Canada. Motts claims that the Caesar is the most popular mixed drink in Canada, estimating that over 350 million Caesars are consumed every year.\n\nIn the United States, the Caesar is typically available at bars along the Canada–United States border. Elsewhere, bartenders will frequently offer a Bloody Mary in its place. In Europe, the drink can be found wherever there are higher concentrations of Canadians. The drink's anonymity outside Canada has continued in spite of concerted marketing efforts. Producers of clam-tomato juices have speculated that their beverages have been hampered by what they describe as the \"clam barrier\". They have found that consumers in the United States fear that there is too much clam in the beverages.\n\nWhile Motts Clamato continues to be synonymous with the cocktail, other producers have begun offering alternative caesar mixes. Walter Caesar (named in honor of Chell) was launched in 2013 to offer an 'all natural' alternative to Clamato. Walter Caesar also became the first caesar mix in Canada to be approved by Ocean Wise by using ocean-friendly clam juice from the North Atlantic.\n\nThe Caesar is popular as a hangover \"cure\", though its effectiveness has been questioned. A study by the University of Toronto released in 1985 showed that drinking a Caesar when taking aspirin could help protect a person's stomach from the damage aspirin causes, as compared with drinking plain tomato juice.\n\nBasic preparation of a Caesar follows the \"one, two, three, four\" rule. The recipe calls for 1–1½ oz of vodka, two dashes of hot sauce, three dashes of salt and pepper, four dashes of Worcestershire sauce and topped with 4–6 oz of caesar mix and served with ice. The ingredients are poured into a glass rimmed with celery salt or a mixture of salt and pepper and garnished with a celery stalk and lime. The Caesar is an unusual drink in that it can be mixed in bulk and stored for a period of time before drinking.\n\nThough it was not one of Chell's original ingredients, Tabasco sauce is a frequent addition, as is horseradish. Vodka is occasionally replaced with gin, tequila or rum, though the Clamato may not be substituted. A variant that replaces vodka with beer is commonly called a \"Red Eye\", and one without alcohol is a \"Virgin Caesar\". The Toronto Institute of Bartending operates a \"Caesar School\" in various locations across Canada that teaches bartenders how to mix several variants of the drink.\n\nMott's holds an annual \"Best Caesar in Town\" competition as part of the Prince Edward Island International Shellfish Festival. Contests held across Canada to celebrate the cocktail's 40th anniversary in 2009 encouraged variants that featured the glass rimmed with Tim Hortons coffee grinds, Caesars with maple syrup, and Caesars with bacon-infused vodka.\n\n"}
{"id": "641891", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=641891", "title": "Pork roll", "text": "Pork roll\n\nPork roll (also known regionally as Taylor ham) is a pork-based processed meat commonly available in New Jersey, New York, Delaware and parts of Pennsylvania and Maryland. It was developed in 1856 by John Taylor of Hamilton Square, New Jersey, and sold as \"Taylor's Prepared Ham\". Other producers entered the market, and subsequent food labeling regulations required Taylor to designate it as a \"pork roll\" alongside its competitors. While \"Taylor Ham\" is technically a brand of pork roll, in regions of North Jersey all brands of pork roll may be referred as Taylor Ham due to John Taylor branding his original pork roll as Taylor.\n\nWhile a similar item, packed minced ham, may have been produced at the time of the Battle of Trenton, John Taylor is credited with creating his secret recipe for the product in 1856. George Washington Case, a farmer and butcher from nearby Belle Mead, New Jersey, later created his own recipe for pork roll in 1870. Case's was reportedly packaged in corn husks.\n\nTaylor originally called his product \"Taylor's Prepared Ham\", but was forced to change the name after it failed to meet the new legal definition of \"ham\" established by the Pure Food and Drug Act of 1906. Marketed as both \"Taylor's Pork Roll\" and \"Trenton Pork Roll\", it saw competition from products with similar names like \"Rolled Pork\" and \"Trenton style Pork Roll\". When their makers were sued by Taylor a 1910 legal case ruled that the words \"Pork Roll\" could not be trademarked. \n\nIn North Jersey, residents continue to use the term Taylor Ham, while South Jersey residents generally use the term Pork Roll, with Central Jersey residents using a mix of the two.\n\nIn the 1910 lawsuit, it was described as \"a food article made of pork, packed in a cylindrical cotton sack or bag in such form that it could be quickly prepared for cooking by slicing without removal from the bag.\" Larry Olmsted of \"USA Today\" has described the taste of the meat as \"a cross between Canadian bacon and bacon, less hammy and smoky than Canadian, fattier and saltier than bacon, with a unique texture, both crispy and slightly mushy.\" \n\nCompanies that make pork roll include Case's Pork Roll, Loeffler's Gourmet, Hatfield Quality Meats and Alderfer Premium of Harleysville, Pennsylvania.\n\nIt is typically eaten as part of a sandwich, with popular condiments including pepper, ketchup, mustard, hot sauce, lettuce, butter and tomato. It is also incorporated in many other recipes, including a popular breakfast sandwich known in the region as a \"Taylor ham, egg and cheese\" or \"pork roll, egg and cheese.\" in which fried pork roll is joined with a fried egg and American cheese and served on a hard roll, bagel or English muffin. New Jersey eateries noted for their Jersey Breakfast include Slater's in Middletown, and Starks United in Keansburg.\n\nTrenton, New Jersey held its Inaugural Pork Roll Festival on May 24, 2014.\n\nThe Trenton Thunder minor league baseball team hosted their inaugural \"Trenton Thunder World Famous Case's Pork Roll Eating Championship\" on September 26, 2015. Joey Chestnut won the contest by eating 32 pork roll sandwiches in 10 minutes.\n\nThe Lakewood BlueClaws minor league baseball team holds a Pork Roll, Egg, and Cheese Race at the end of the fourth inning of every home game.\n\nA song called \"Pork Roll Egg and Cheese\" appears on the album \"The Pod\" by Ween, locals of New Hope, Pennsylvania, referring specifically to a sandwich consisting of pork roll, egg and cheese on a kaiser roll. Several other songs by the band such as \"Frank\" also contain references to pork roll.\n\nOn April 14, 2016, Assemblyman Tim Eustace introduced an Act in the New Jersey State Legislature designating the Taylor Ham, egg, and cheese sandwich as the New Jersey State Sandwich and supplementing chapter 9A of Title 52 of the Revised Statutes. \"An Act designating the Taylor Ham, egg, and cheese sandwich as the New Jersey State Sandwich and supplementing chapter 9A of Title 52 of the Revised Statutes.\"\n\nOn May 15, 2016, President Barack Obama gave a commencement speech at Rutgers University's 250th graduation ceremony in which he referenced the \"Taylor Ham vs. pork roll debate\", saying, \"I come here for a simple reason – to finally settle this pork roll vs. Taylor Ham question...I'm just kidding...There's not much I'm afraid to take on in my final year of office, but I know better than to get in the middle of that debate.\"\n\n\n"}
{"id": "642702", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=642702", "title": "Tart", "text": "Tart\n\nA tart is a baked dish consisting of a filling over a pastry base with an open top not covered with pastry. The pastry is usually shortcrust pastry; the filling may be sweet or savoury, though modern tarts are usually fruit-based, sometimes with custard. Tartlet refers to a miniature tart; an example would be egg tarts. The categories of \"tart\", \"flan\", \"quiche\", and \"pie\" overlap, with no sharp distinctions.\n\nThe French word \"tarte\" can be translated to mean either pie or tart, as both are mainly the same with the exception of a pie usually covering the filling in pastry, while flans and tarts leave it open.\n\nTarts are thought to have either come from a tradition of layering food, or to be a product of Medieval pie making. Enriched dough (i.e. short crust) is thought to have been first commonly used in 1550, approximately 200 years after pies. In this period, they were viewed as high-cuisine, popular with nobility, in contrast to the view of a commoners pie. While originally savoury, with meat fillings, culinary tastes led to sweet tarts to prevail, filling tarts instead with fruit and custard.Early medieval tarts generally had meat fillings, but later ones were often based on fruit and custard.\n\nAn early tart was the Italian crostata, dating to at least the mid-15th century. It has been described as a \"rustic free-form version of an open fruit tart\".\n\nTarts are typically free-standing with firm pastry base consisting of dough, itself made of flour, thick filling, and perpendicular sides while pies may have softer pastry, looser filling, and sloped sides, necessitating service from the pie plate.\n\nThere are many types of tarts, with popular varieties including Treacle tart, meringue tart, tarte tatin and Bakewell tart. Another popular tart flavour is jam tarts, which may be different colours depending on the flavour of the jam used to fill them.\n\n\"Tarte Tatin\" is an upside-down tart, of apples, other fruit, or onions.\n\nSavoury tarts include quiche, a family of savoury tarts with a mostly custard filling; German Zwiebelkuchen 'onion tart', and Swiss cheese tart made from Gruyere.\n\n"}
{"id": "643001", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=643001", "title": "Leberkäse", "text": "Leberkäse\n\n\"Fleischkäse\" is said to have been invented in 1776, although this story has been heavily contested. The name \"\"Leberkäse\"\" literally translates to \"liver-cheese\" but developed by folk etymology from an archaic form of the word \"Laib\" (\"loaf\") and \"Käse\" (\"cheese\") (\"cf.\" English \"head cheese\"); not all products bearing the name necessarily contain liver or cheese, let alone both: According to German food laws, only products called \"Bavarian Leberkäse\" are allowed not to contain liver; otherwise, there must be a minimum liver content of 4%. Some local variants must contain even more liver; for example, the liver content of \"Stuttgarter Leberkäse\" must be at least 5%. The type without liver is normally called \"Fleischkäse\" (meat cheese) if it is not made in Bavaria.\n\n\"Leberkäse\" is traditionally enjoyed in a variety of ways, including:\n\nKnown variants include:\n\n\nIn addition, many butchers have invented their own unique varieties.\n"}
{"id": "644325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=644325", "title": "Lye roll", "text": "Lye roll\n\nLye rolls are a baked specialty in Germany (especially in Bavaria and Swabia), Austria, and Switzerland. They are made by immersing bread rolls in a lye solution before baking. The German name is \"Laugengebäck\" for any baked good dipped in lye. The perhaps best known shape is the pretzel, while rolls or buns are specifically called \"Laugensemmel\" or \"Kastanie\" (Bavarian), \"Laugeweckle\", or \"Laugestängle\" (Swabian), and \"Laugenwecken\", \"Laugenbrötchen\" or \"Laugenstange\" (everywhere else in Germany); \"Laugenweckerl\" in Austria; \"Silserli\" or \"Laugenbrötli\" in Switzerland. In some parts of Asia they are known as \"laugen rolls\".\n\nIn order to cause a Maillard reaction during baking for the characteristic browning effect, a lye roll needs to be coated with a high pH (alkaline) solution. The higher the pH, the stronger the reaction. Lye is a highly alkaline agent most commonly used for the purpose. However, lye is not the only way to produce this result: a baking soda or washing soda solution, which is easier to handle and safer to use, will provide a similar product but will not power as strong a reaction, so the effect will be less pronounced. Lye is the strongest agent, followed by washing soda then baking soda.\n\nThe same solution is also used for preparing pretzels; outside of Germany they are often the only baked food commonly glazed with a lye solution.\n\nBoth lye rolls and pretzels are typically covered with salt, preferably pretzel salt, a large-grained salt made from compressed smaller salt particles, which reduces moisture absorption and the hardness of the salt grain. As a snack, lye rolls may also be sold covered with baked cheese, although this is more recent and less common. Typically they are cut in half and buttered, as large soft pretzels often are in Germany and Switzerland as well. Other toppings for lye rolls nowadays also include poppyseed, sesame, and other seeds as an alternative to salt.\n\n"}
{"id": "648144", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=648144", "title": "Golden Cadillac", "text": "Golden Cadillac\n\nThe Gold Cadillac is a cocktail made with Galliano, white crème de cacao, and cream. It is classified as an \"after-dinner\" drink, a digestif. This cocktail originated at Poor Red's in the town of El Dorado, California.\n\nSometime in 1952, a woman and her new fiance came into Poor Red's, a small restaurant in the Gold Country of California, located in the Town of Eldorado on the Lincoln Highway. They were on their way to Lake Tahoe, Nevada to celebrate their engagement. The Couple asked Frank Cline, long time bartender to create a cocktail in their honor. After some trial and error, Cline finally created a drink using Galliano, Creme de Cacao, half and half and blended with ice. The couple loved it and since it had no name, Cline asked the couple what they wanted to call it. The couple decided to name it after their brand new Gold Cadillac, parked out front.\n"}
{"id": "649497", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=649497", "title": "Ten High", "text": "Ten High\n\nTen High is a brand of American whiskey first introduced in the 1930s by Hiram Walker & Sons, now produced by the Barton Brands division of the Sazerac Company. The name \"Ten High\" refers to a barrel storage location at least ten ricks high, as barrels in the upper part of the aging warehouse mature faster. Although the brand name evoked this storage method, the manufacturer did not actually promise that the brand was from barrels aged in such locations.\n\nThe brand was originally produced by Hiram Walker & Sons (a company owned by Harry C. Hatch at the time) at a distillery in Peoria, Illinois, starting shortly after the end of Prohibition in 1933. It was a major brand (and the leading brand of Illinois-made bourbon) until the late 1960s when the American whiskey market went through a particularly difficult period. The Peoria distillery stopped distilling operations in 1973 and closed completely in 1981. After the Peoria distillery closed, production moved first to Heaven Hill and later to Barton, both based in Bardstown, Kentucky. The Sazerac Company acquired Barton, including the Ten High brand, in 2009.\n\nFrom the early 1980s until the late 2000s, Ten High was a straight Bourbon whiskey. Starting in 2009, the brand switched to being labelled \"Bourbon – a blend\", a designation for a product that is 51 percent straight Bourbon, with the remainder neutral spirits.\n\n"}
{"id": "650904", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=650904", "title": "Malak", "text": "Malak\n\nMal'ak (also spelled Malak, Melek) is the Semitic word for \"angel\" (, \"malāk\"; Hebrew מַלְאָךְ; Ge'ez መልዐክ, \"mal`āk\"; Aramaic מלאך). \nThe plural of \"malak\" (\"angels\") is ملائكه \"malaa`ikah\" in Arabic, מַלְאָכִים \"malakim\" in Hebrew, and መላዕክት \"mala`ikt\" in Ge'ez.\n\nIn Arabic and Turkish, it is also used as a given name (both male and female).\n\nThe Turkish form of the name is Melek.\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "652494", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=652494", "title": "Rijsttafel", "text": "Rijsttafel\n\nThe Indonesian rijsttafel (), a Dutch word that literally translates to \"rice table\", is an elaborate meal adapted by the Dutch following the \"hidang\" presentation of nasi Padang from the Padang region of West Sumatra. It consists of many (forty is not an unusual number) side dishes served in small portions, accompanied by rice prepared in several different ways. Popular side dishes include egg rolls, sambals, satay, fish, fruit, vegetables, pickles, and nuts. In most areas where it is served, such as the Netherlands, and other areas of heavy Dutch influence (such as parts of the West Indies), it is known under its Dutch name.\n\nAlthough the dishes served are undoubtedly Indonesian, the \"rijsttafel\"’s origins were colonial. The Dutch introduced the rice table not only so they could enjoy a wide array of dishes at a single setting but also to impress visitors with the exotic abundance of their colony.\n\n\"Rijsttafels\" strive to feature an array of not only flavors and colors and degrees of spiciness but also textures, an aspect that is not commonly discussed in Western food. Such textures may include crispy, chewy, slippery, soft, hard, velvety, gelatinous, and runny.\n\nThe \"rijsttafel\" was created to provide a festive and official type of banquet that would represent the multi-ethnic nature of the Indonesian archipelago. Dishes were assembled from many of the far flung regions of Indonesia, where many different cuisines exist, often determined by ethnicity and culture of the particular island or island group — from Javanese favourite \"sateh\", \"tempeh\" and \"seroendeng\", to vegetarian cuisine \"gado-gado\" and \"lodeh\" with \"sambal lalab\" from Batavia and Preanger. From spicy \"rendang\" and \"gulai\" curry from the Minangkabau region in Sumatra, to East Indies ubiquitous dishes \"nasi goreng\", \"soto ayam\", and \"kroepoek\" crackers. Also Indonesian dishes from hybrid influences; such as Chinese \"babi ketjap\", \"loempia\", and \"bamie\" to European beef smoor. And there are many others from the hundreds of inhabited islands, which contain more than 300 regional and ethnic language groups.\n\nDuring its centuries of popularity in Dutch East Indies, lines of servants or sarong-clad waitresses ceremoniously served the marathon meal on platters laden with steaming bowls of fragrant foods. The first to be served was a cone-shaped pile of rice on a large platter, which the server placed in the center of the table. The servers then surrounded the rice platter with as many as 40 small bowls holding meat and vegetable dishes as well as condiments. During its colonial heyday, the most celebrated \"rijsttafel\" in the Indies was served for Sunday luncheon at the Hotel des Indes in Batavia and the Savoy Homann Hotel in Bandung, where the rice was accompanied by sixty different dishes.\n\nBrought back to the Netherlands by former colonials and exiled Indonesians and Indo-Europeans (Eurasians) after Indonesia gained its independence in 1945, the \"rijsttafel\" was predominantly popular with Dutch families with colonial roots. On the other hand, when Indonesia proclaimed its independence in 1945, nationalist sentiment promoted the rejection of Dutch colonial culture and customs, including the flamboyant rice table. Today, the rice table has practically disappeared from Indonesia's restaurants and is served only by a handful of fine-dining restaurants in Indonesia.\n\nMore of a banquet than a regular meal, the \"rijsttafel\" has survived Indonesia's independence, composed as it is of indigenous Indonesian dishes, and is served in some mainstream restaurants in Indonesia. A typical \"rijsttafel\" will have several dining tables covered with different dishes; while in some fancy settings in Indonesia, each dish may be served by a separate waitress. Since about 1990, Indonesian food has become part of a mainstream interest in South East Asian cuisine, and there has been a proliferation of Indonesian restaurants in the Netherlands.\n\nThe following is a brief, but not nearly complete, list of examples of foods that may be found on a \"rijsttafel\":\n\nDespite its popularity in the Netherlands and abroad, the \"rijsttafel\" is rarely found in Indonesia. That is probably because most Indonesian meals consist of rice accompanied by only one, two or three dishes, mostly consisting of \"lauk\" (fish, chicken, meat, egg, or other source of protein), \"sayur\" (vegetable), and other side dishes. To consume more than that number of dishes at once (a \"rijsttafel\" might range from seven to forty dishes) is considered too extravagant and too expensive. The closest versions to rice table dishes readily available in Indonesia are local nasi Padang and nasi campur. However, in Indonesian restaurants around the world, especially in the Netherlands and South Africa, the \"rijsttafel\" is still popular.\n\nToday only a handful of dining establishments in Indonesia ceremoniously serve elaborate colonial-style \"rijsttafel\". In July 2011, the airline Garuda Indonesia launched Indonesian \"rijsttafel\" in Executive Class as its signature in-flight service. This Indonesian signature dining was meant to introduce the passenger to a wide array of Indonesian cuisine in a single setting as part of Garuda Indonesia experience. This in-flight Indonesian \"rijsttafel\" includes Indonesian signature dishes; choices of nasi kuning or regular steamed rice, accompanied with choices of dishes such as satay, rendang, gado-gado grilled chicken rica, red snapper in yellow acar sauce, fried shrimp in sambal, potato perkedel and tempeh, also with kerupuk or rempeyek crackers.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "652972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=652972", "title": "Corn dog", "text": "Corn dog\n\nA corn dog (also spelled corndog) is a sausage (usually a hot dog) on a stick that has been coated in a thick layer of cornmeal batter and deep fried. It originated in the United States and is commonly found in American cuisine.\n\nNewly arrived German Texan sausage-makers, finding resistance to the sausages they used to make, have been credited with introducing the corn dog to the United States, though the serving stick came later. A US patent filed in 1927, granted in 1929, for a \"Combined Dipping, Cooking, and Article Holding Apparatus,\" describes corn dogs, among other fried food impaled on a stick; it reads in part:\nIn \"300 Years of Kitchen Collectibles\", author Linda Campbell Franklin states that a \"Krusty Korn Dog\" baker machine appeared in the 1929 Albert Pick-L. Barth wholesale catalog of hotel and restaurant supplies. The 'korn dogs' were baked in a corn batter and resembled ears of corn when cooked.\n\nA number of current corn dog vendors claim responsibility for the invention and/or popularization of the corn dog. Carl and Neil Fletcher lay such a claim, having introduced their \"Corny Dogs\" at the Texas State Fair sometime between 1938 and 1942. The Pronto Pup vendors at the Minnesota State Fair claim to have invented the corn dog in 1941. Cozy Dog Drive-in, in Springfield, Illinois, claims to have been the first to serve corn dogs on sticks, on June 16, 1946. Also in 1946, Dave Barham opened the first location of Hot Dog on a Stick at Muscle Beach in Santa Monica, California. The earliest known preparation of corn dogs, however, was in 1937. During a high school baseball game in Adel, Iowa, ballpark vendors ran out of hot dog buns in the middle of the third inning. Roger Newman, a local tavern owner in attendance, took the remaining hot dogs and breaded them in a cornmeal batter he had prepared for an upcoming fish fry, and returned to the ballpark with them. Patrons used a variety of means to hold the corn dogs, including wax paper, paper cones, and even pocket knives. \n\nCorn dogs are often served as street food or as fast food. For the best and freshest preparation, some vendors or restaurateurs dip and fry their dogs just before serving. Some corn dog purveyors sell pre-made frozen corn dogs, which have been thawed and then fried again or browned in an oven.\n\nCorn dogs can also be found at almost any supermarket in North America as frozen food that can be heated and served. Pre-made frozen corn dogs can also be heated in a microwave oven, but the cornbread coating will lack texture.\n\nOne cheesy variation is prepared either with melted cheese between the hot dog and the breading or by using a cheese-filled hot dog.\n\nAnother version is the \"cornbrat\" (or \"corn brat\"), which is a corn dog made with bratwurst instead of a wiener or hot dog. They are also sold using different meats in the dog, such as pork and turkey.\n\nSmall corn dogs, known as \"corn puppies\", \"mini corn dogs\", or \"corn dog nuggets\", are a variation served in some restaurants, generally on the children's menu or at fast food establishments. A serving includes multiple pieces, usually 10. In contrast to their larger counterparts, corn puppies are normally served stickless as finger food.\n\nA breakfast version of the corn dog features a breakfast sausage in place of the hot dog, and pancake batter in place of the cornmeal. This variation is commonly called a \"pancake on a stick\". It was formerly served by the drive-in restaurant Sonic, but now is made by companies such as Jimmy Dean.\n\nBoth vegetarian corn dogs and corn dog nuggets are made as meatless alternatives by many of the same companies that produce vegetarian hot dogs.\n\nIn Argentina, a \"panchuker\" (or \"panchuque\", \"pancho chino\") is a hot snack that can be bought near some train stations and in some places of heavy pedestrian transit. They are more popular in the inner country cities. A panchuker consists of a sausage covered with a waffle-like pastry, and has a stick in it (like a corn dog) so that it can be easily consumed. Some versions contain cheese, and sauces may be served to accompany them. Some variations may be found in Uruguay and other South American countries. Generally, panchuckers are offered as a low-price fast food and can only be seen at certain provinces of the inner country, like La Plata, Belgrano, Villa Albertina, Cipoletti, and in Buenos Aires they can be found in Barrio Chino. They are particularly popular in the province of Tucumán.\n\nIn Australia, a hot dog sausage on a stick, deep fried in batter, is known as a Dagwood Dog, Pluto Pup, or Dippy Dog, depending on region. Variants use wheat-based or corn-based batters. These are not to be confused with the Australian battered sav, a saveloy deep fried in a wheat flour-based batter, as used for fish and chips, which generally does not contain cornmeal.\n\nIn Canada, a battered hot dog on a stick is called a \"pogo\" and is traditionally eaten with ordinary, yellow mustard, sometimes referred to as \"ballpark mustard\". It is named after the trademarked name of a Conagra inc. frozen product available in all of the country since the 1960s but whose main market is the province of Quebec.\n\nOutside of Auckland, a New Zealand Hot Dog is invariably a deep fried battered sausage on a stick that is dipped in tomato ketchup. The batter can be cornmeal based or normal flour based. The distinction is not important. The sausage in a bun that is called a hot dog in other countries is known as an American Hot Dog. \n\nIn Japan, the equivelent food is usually called an \"American Dog\" (アメリカンドッグ) based on the idea of where the food is believed to originate. \n\nIn South Korea, a corn dog is one of the most popular street foods. A corn dog is usually called \"hot dog\" in the Korean language (핫도그), creating confusion with a genuine hot dog. A French fry-encrusted corn dog, or \"Kogo,\" has especially attracted the attention of Western visitors, including vegans (using vegan hot dogs).\n\nNational Corndog Day is a celebration of the corn dog, tater tots, and American beer that occurs on the first Saturday of March madness (NCAA Men's Division I Basketball Championship) of every year.\n"}
{"id": "653415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=653415", "title": "Generalized nondeterministic finite automaton", "text": "Generalized nondeterministic finite automaton\n\nIn the theory of computation, a generalized nondeterministic finite automaton (GNFA), also known as an expression automaton or a generalized nondeterministic finite state machine, is a variation of a \nnondeterministic finite automaton (NFA) where each transition is labeled with any regular expression. The GNFA reads blocks of symbols from the input which constitute a string as defined by the regular expression on the transition. There are several differences between a standard finite state machine and a generalized nondeterministic finite state machine. A GNFA must have only one start state and one accept state, and these cannot be the same state, whereas a NFA or DFA both may have several accept states, and the start state can be an accept state. A GNFA must have only one transition between any two states, whereas a NFA or DFA both allow for numerous transitions between states. In a GNFA, a state has a single transition to every state in the machine, although often it is a convention to ignore the transitions that are labelled with the empty set when drawing generalized nondeterministic finite state machines.\n\nA GNFA can be defined as a 5-tuple, (\"S\", Σ, \"T\", \"s\", \"a\"), consisting of\nwhere \"R\" is the collection of all regular expressions over the alphabet Σ.\n\nThe transition function takes as its argument a pair of two states and outputs a regular expression (the label of the transition). This differs from other finite state machines, which take as input a single state and an input from the alphabet (or the empty string in the case of nondeterministic finite state machines) and outputs the next state (or the set of possible states in the case of nondeterministic finite state machines). A DFA or NFA can easily be converted into a GNFA and then the GNFA can be easily converted into a regular expression by repeatedly collapsing parts of it to single edges until \"S\" = {\"s\", \"a\"}. Similarly, GNFAs can be reduced to NFAs by changing regular expression operators into new edges until each edge is labelled with a regular expression matching a single string of length at most 1. NFAs, in turn, can be reduced to DFAs using the powerset construction. This shows that GNFAs recognize the same set of formal languages as DFAs and NFAs.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "654362", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=654362", "title": "Vallis (planetary geology)", "text": "Vallis (planetary geology)\n\nVallis (plural \"valles\") is the Latin word for \"valley\". It is used in planetary geology to name landform features on other planets.\n\nScientists used \"'vallis\" for old river valleys they discovered when they sent the first probes to Mars. The Viking Orbiters caused a revolution in our ideas about water on Mars; finding huge river valleys in many areas. Space craft cameras showed that floods of water broke through dams, carved deep valleys, eroded grooves into bedrock, and traveled thousands of kilometers. Some valles on Mars (Mangala Vallis, Athabasca Vallis, Granicus Vallis, and Tinjar Valles) clearly begin at graben. On the other hand, some of the large outflow channels begin in rubble-filled low areas called chaos or chaotic terrain. It has been suggested that massive amounts of water were trapped under pressure beneath a thick cryosphere (layer of frozen ground), then the water was suddenly released, perhaps when the cryosphere was broken by a fault.\n\nNirgal Vallis is one of the longest valley networks on Mars. It is so large that it is found on more than one quadrangle. Scientists are not sure about how all the ancient river valleys were formed. There is evidence that instead of rain or snow, the water that formed the valleys originated underground. One mechanism that has been advanced is sapping. In sapping, the ground just gives away as water comes out. Sapping is common in some desert areas in America's Southwest. Sapping forms alcoves and stubby tributaries. These features are visible in the picture from the Coprates quadrangle of Nigal Vallis taken with Mars Odyssey's THEMIS.\n\nOne of the most significant features of the Lunae Palus region, Kasei Valles, is one of the largest outflow channels on Mars. Like other outflow channels, it was carved by liquid water, probably during gigantic floods.\n\nKasei is about long. Some sections of Kasei Valles are wide. It begins in Echus Chasma, near Valles Marineris, and empties into Chryse Planitia, not far from where Viking 1 landed. Sacra Mensa, a large tableland divides Kasei into northern and southern channels.\n\nScientists suggest it was formed by several episodes of flooding and maybe by some glacial activity.\n\nThe floors of some channels have features called lineated floor deposits. They are ridged and grooved materials that seem to deflect around obstacles. Scientists believe they are ice-rich. Some glaciers on the Earth show such features. Lineated floor deposits may be related to lobate debris aprons, which have been proven to contain large amounts of ice. Reull Vallis, as pictured below, displays these deposits.\nDao Vallis begins near a large volcano, called Hadriaca Patera, so it is thought to have received water when hot magma melted huge amounts of ice in the frozen ground. The partially circular depressions on the left side of the channel in the image below suggests that groundwater sapping also contributed water.\n\n"}
{"id": "654732", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=654732", "title": "Rice Krispies", "text": "Rice Krispies\n\nRice Krispies (also known as Rice Bubbles in Australia and New Zealand) is a breakfast cereal marketed by Kellogg's in 1927 and released to the public in 1928. Rice Krispies are made of crisped rice (rice and sugar paste that is formed into rice shapes or \"berries\", cooked, dried and toasted), and expand forming very thin and hollowed out walls that are crunchy and crisp. When milk is added to the cereal the walls tend to collapse, creating the \"Snap, crackle and pop\" sounds.\n\nRice Krispies cereal has a long advertising history, with the elf cartoon characters Snap, Crackle and Pop touting the brand. In 1963, The Rolling Stones recorded a short song for a Rice Krispies television advertisement.\n\nRice crispies are made by the Kellogg Company. The \"Snap, Crackle and Pop\" slogan was in use by 1939 when the cereal was advertised as staying \"crackly crisp in milk or cream...not mushy!\" with claims that the cereal would remain floating (without sinking to the bottom of the bowl) even after 2 hours in milk. They were not a shredded or flaked cereal type, but were instead created by a patented process that Kellogg's called \"oven-popping\".\n\nThe original patent called for using partially dried grain, which could be whole or broken, that would have 15-30% moisture which could then be shaped by existing processes for cereal production that include rolling, flaking, shredding, etc. After being processed to the desired shape the grain is dried to around 5-14% moisture content at which stage the grain will expand when subjected to a high temperature creating a light, low-density product that is crisp and easy to chew.\n\nRice Krispies contain rice, sugar, salt, malt flavoring, iron, ascorbic acid (vitamin C), alpha tocopherol acetate (vitamin E), niacinamide, vitamin A palmitate, pyridoxine hydrochloride (vitamin B6), riboflavin (vitamin B2), thiamin hydrochloride (vitamin B1), folic acid, vitamin B12 (as cyanocobalamin), and vitamin D.\n\nAccording to Kellogg's, the rice used in the US version of the cereal is grown in the states of Louisiana and Arkansas.\n\nKellogg Company was found by the Federal Trade Commission to be making unsubstantiated and misleading health claims in advertising on Rice Krispies boxes. Claims made by the company included \"now helps support your child's immunity\" and \"has been improved to include antioxidants and nutrients that your family needs to help them stay healthy.\" The FTC had previously found fault with Kellogg's claims that Frosted Mini-Wheats cereal improved kids' attentiveness by nearly 20%.\n\nThe names of other products within the Rice Krispies family vary depending on where they are sold:\n\nMany generic versions of Rice Krispies (including frosted and chocolate variants) have been produced by other manufacturers under many different names.\n\nRice Krispies with dehydrated miniature marshmallows (Marshmallow Rice Krispies, also known as Marshmallow Krispies, along with a tropical version, Fruity Marshmallow Krispies) were sold briefly in the United States and Canada. Despite surviving longer in Canada than the United States, they were finally discontinued altogether during the late 1990s.\n\nRice Krispies with strawberry flavor included 1983's Strawberry Krispies and 1997's Strawberry Rice Krispies. Australia had Strawberry Pops, a strawberry version of Rice Bubbles which was discontinued along with other similarly coloured and sweetened foods in the mid-1970s due to concerns about the additives causing cancer. Banana-flavored Rice Krispies, including Banana Bubbles and Banana Krispies, have also been sold in the past.\n\nAn extremely sweet, artificially-colored cereal, Razzle Dazzle Rice Krispies, was sold from late 1997 to 1999.\n\nApple Cinnamon Rice Krispies, a cereal flavored with apple and cinnamon, was sold in the early 1990s.\n\nAlso discontinued are Rice Krispies with berry flavors, including Berry Krispies and Berry Rice Krispies.\n\nIn the late 1990s, Rice Krispies with honey, Honey Rice Krispies, was sold in the U.K. and Canada for a short period of time.\n\nIn the late 1990s, Kellogg's sold Halloween versions of their regular cereal. This included Halloween Rice Krispies which featured a variety of orange krispies.\n\nIn 1939, Kellogg's employee Mildred Day concocted and published a recipe for a Camp Fire Girls bake sale consisting of Rice Krispies, melted marshmallows, and margarine. It has remained a very popular snack dubbed Rice Krispies Treats. Kellogg's themselves have now produced commercial varieties of both marshmallow and chocolate-based treats under the name Rice Krispies Squares in Canada and the UK, as well as versions under the original Rice Krispies Treats name sold in the United States.\n\nIn Australia, Rice Bubbles are found in a well-known homemade sweet, the chocolate crackle. This is often found at fetes and consists of Rice Bubbles, copha and cocoa, amongst other things. In the UK, a similar treat is made of Rice Krispies and melted chocolate. White Christmas is another Australian sweet made with Rice Bubbles, milk powder, copha and dried fruit.\n\nKellogg's also produces commercial versions of Rice Krispie treats known as Rice Krispies Squares, cereal bars, and a multi-grain cereal known as Rice Krispies Multi-Grain (formerly Muddles) sold on the UK market. Primarily aimed at children, Multi-Grain contains a prebiotic and is claimed by Kellogg's to promote good digestive health.\n\nSnap! Crackle! and Pop!, the animated cartoon mascots for Rice Krispies, were created by illustrator Vernon Grant in the 1930s. The original gnome-like Snap! first appeared in 1933 on a package of Kellogg's Rice Krispies. Crackle! and Pop! came later, and since 1939, the three have been together in many forms of advertising, including radio, movie shorts, and comic strips. An updated version of the elf-like Snap! Crackle! and Pop! appeared for the first time on television in 1960; before that it was advertised by Woody Woodpecker. They are the first and longest-running cartoon characters to represent a Kellogg's product.\n\n\nThe cereal is marketed on the basis of the noises it produces when milk is added to the bowl. The onomatopoeic noises differ by country and language:\n\n\nIn 1938 and 1939, Vernon Grant, the illustrator who created Snap, Crackle and Pop!, produced a set of six illustrations of Mother Goose themes including Humpty Dumpty, Jack and Jill, Jack Be Nimble, Little Jack Horner, Peter Peter Pumpkin Eater, and Twinkle Twinkle Little Star that were offered as premiums in exchange for two Rice Krispies boxtops and a three-cent stamp.\n\nIn 2004, packets of Pop Rocks were packed inside specially marked boxes of Rice Krispies. Television commercials showed the candy exciting Pop!, who shouts his own name and the audience responds with \"Rocks!\", while Crackle! laments that the candy should be called \"Crackle Rocks\".\n\n\n"}
{"id": "656105", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=656105", "title": "Pixy Stix", "text": "Pixy Stix\n\nPixy Stix is a sweet and sour colored powdered candy usually packaged in a wrapper that resembles a drinking straw. Pixy Stix is a registered trademark of Société des Produits Nestlé S.A., Vevey, Switzerland.\n\nThe candy is usually poured into the mouth from the wrapper, which is made out of plastic or paper. Pixy Stix contain dextrose, citric acid, and artificial and natural flavors.\n\nPixy Stix were invented by Sunline Inc. in St. Louis, Missouri. The concept for this powdered candy originated in 1942 and was derived from a penny drink mix sold as Fruzola Jr. by the Fruzola Company in Salt Lake City, Utah. When J. Fish Smith found that children were eating the sweet and sour powder straight from the package, he modified the formula and branded it as Lik-M-Aid. \n\nAn affiliated company, Fruzola Company of St. Louis, which later became Sunline, Inc., was founded in 1952 by Menlo F. Smith to manufacture and market Lik-M-Aid nationwide. In 1959, the product was packaged in color-striped straws and introduced as Pixy Stix. Several years later, Lik-M-Aid was modified with a multi-compartment package containing two flavors and a candy stick used to dip the candy out of the package, thereby dubbed Fun Dip. Pixy Stix are currently manufactured by Wonka Confections, a division of Nestle.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "657055", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=657055", "title": "Ice cream sandwich", "text": "Ice cream sandwich\n\nAn ice cream sandwich is a frozen dessert consisting of ice cream between two skins, crusts, or other similar biscuit. In America the crusts could be described as wafers or cookies, though sometimes literal cookies are used instead.\n\nWithin Australia, ice cream sandwiches are given the commercial name of \"Giant Sandwich\" (recognizable by its distinct blue and pink wrapper), and \"Monaco Bar\" (recognizable by its gold and black metallic wrapper) in the Eastern states. Other varieties include Streets \"Cookie\", \"Maxibon\" (with one-half ice cream sandwich) and \"Maxibon Cookie\", and \"Pat and Stick's Homemade range\" (recognizable by its circular shape).\n\nThe original ice cream sandwich was commonly known as a \"cream between\". One purchased a small block of ice cream wrapped in paper and placed it between two wafers.\n\nThe classic Iranian ice cream sandwich is called بستنی نانی meaning \"bread-ice cream\", and is made with Iranian traditional ice cream in two pieces of wafer. Iranian traditional ice cream is usually made of shaken milk, eggs, sugar, saffron, salep, rose water, or vanilla.\n\nIn North America, an ice cream sandwich is a slice of ice cream, usually vanilla although other flavors can be used, sandwiched between two rectangular cookie wafers (usually chocolate-flavored), and normally rectangular in shape. This was originally created and patented by Jack Delaney, Tim Jones, John Defilippis and Sam West in 1963. Pictures from the Jersey Shore circa 1905 \"On the beach, Atlantic City\", show ice cream sandwiches were popular at 1¢ each. A Chipwich, where ice cream (usually vanilla) is sandwiched between two chocolate chip cookies, is also popular.\n\nIn Israel, ice cream sandwiches are commonly known as \"Kasata\" (קסטה in Hebrew). The name finds its origin in a variation of the Italian dessert Cassata, which consists of sponge cake and layers of ice cream. The Israeli Kasata, which today has little to do with the Italian Cassata, is fairly popular. It usually consists of two thick biscuits holding a mix of block of vanilla and chocolate flavored ice cream.\n\nLocal ice cream sellers/peddlers with their pushcarts that travel around cities sometimes offer ice cream sandwiches, and the bread being the pandesal.\n\nWafer ice cream is a type of ice cream popular in Singapore, often known as \"potong\" (cut) ice cream, which consists of two wafers holding together a block of ice cream. (This is not to be confused with commercially available 'ice potong', which is a rectangular prism of ice cream mounted on a wooden stick.) Vendors are commonly found along Orchard Road and Chinatown and outside schools. A colloquial term for it is \"\"pia\" ice cream\", which translates to \"biscuit ice cream\" in the Hokkien dialect.\n\nCommon flavours offered include ripple, red bean, yam, sweet corn, durian, honeydew, peppermint, chocolate, and chocolate chip.\n\nWafer ice cream vendors also sell the same blocks of ice cream on slices of multicolored bread, on cones or in cups instead of sandwiched between wafers.\n\nThe ice cream block is essentially a huge log of ice cream, which is then cut (hence the name \"potong)\" and sandwiched between two wafers. There are differences between countries: Singaporean street vendors do not offer individually wrapped ice cream sandwiches like Australia does.\n\nIn the United Kingdom an ice cream wafer, consisting of a small block of ice cream between two rectangular wafer biscuits, was a popular alternative to a cone up until the 1980s. Since then it has declined and is now rarely seen. A \"nougat wafer\" was also available, consisting of a layer of nougat sandwiched between two wafers and coated with chocolate around the edges. Typically a vanilla block (or a layer of soft-serve) sandwiched between one plain wafer and one chocolate-covered nougat one. Nougat wafers came in double or triple varieties, depending on the number of nougat wafers in the construction.\n\nIn Scotland and Ireland they are known as \"sliders\" or an ice cream wafer, and are usually served as vanilla ice cream sandwiched between two rectangular chocolate wafers. A \"double nougat\" is ice cream sandwiched between two nougat wafers. The wafers are not covered in chocolate, only the edges. The main manufacturer in Glasgow was the Verbest Cream Wafer Company which ceased after the manufacturer died in 1963.\n\nIn Uruguay an ice cream sandwich (\"sánguche helado\") or triple sandwich (\"sánguche triple\") is typically a neapolitan ice cream (\"helado triple\") sandwich prepared with wafers such as the one in the image.\n\nIn Vietnam, an ice cream sandwich called ' is commonly sold on the street as a snack. It consists of scoops of ice cream stuffed inside a ', topped with crushed peanuts.\n\n"}
{"id": "657061", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=657061", "title": "Breadstick", "text": "Breadstick\n\nBreadsticks (also known as grissini, grissino or dipping sticks) are generally pencil-sized sticks of crisp, dry baked bread that originated in Italy.\n\nIt's believed that it originated in 1643, when a Florentine abbot described a long-shaped and \"bone-thin\" bread being made in a town outside of Turin. Tradition states, however, that it originated in the region of Piedmont in the 17th century, invented by a baker called Antonio Brunero, from Turin. It was a food that was intended to be easier to digest for the Duke Victor Amadeus II of Savoy, who had digestive problems in his childhood.\n\nBreadsticks may be offered at the table in restaurants as an appetizer. In some instances or regions they may be a type that is larger than pencil-sized. They may also be combined with ingredients such as prosciutto as an hors d'œuvre. In many North American restaurants, breadsticks are frequently topped with butter, garlic, and cheese when served as appetizers; as a dessert item, they can be topped with cinnamon sugar and icing.\n\nPre-made, dried breadsticks can be found being sold in markets as a quick snack or a pre-meal appetizer for home use, somewhat similar to a cracker. Usually served with a dip of some sort, such as cheese.\n\nAnother recipe for breadsticks, called \"rosquilletas\", exists in Comunitat Valenciana (Spain).\n\n"}
{"id": "657417", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=657417", "title": "Kalakukko", "text": "Kalakukko\n\nKalakukko is a traditional food from the Finnish region of Savonia made from fish baked inside a loaf of bread. Kalakukko is especially popular in Kuopio, capital city of the Northern Savonia region. Kuopio is home to many kalakukko bakeries. The city also hosts an annual kalakukko baking contest.\n\nTraditionally, kalakukko is prepared with rye flour (like ruisleipä), although wheat is often added to make the dough more pliable. The filling consists of fish, pork and bacon, and is seasoned with salt (unless the pork is already salted). After being baked for several hours, traditionally in a masonry oven, kalakukko looks much like a large loaf of rye bread. If prepared correctly, bones of the fish soften and the meat and fish juices cook thoroughly inside the bread. This results in a moist filling.\n\nTraditionally, the fish used in kalakukko is either vendace (), or European perch (). Sometimes salmon is used. In southern Savonia the vendace is advocated as the only fish for the true kalakukko whereas in the northern parts of the province the same is said about the perch. Instead of fish, combinations of potato and pork or rutabaga and pork are also used. The appropriate drink to accompany kalakukko is buttermilk or \"piimä\".\n\nKalakukko will keep for a long time when unopened. It used to be a practical lunch for workers away from home.\n\nKalakukko can be reheated in an oven. It takes about one hour in if the size of the kalakukko is about . It can also be eaten cold. The usual way to eat kalakukko is to open the top with a sharp knife, eat the top with butter, and then slice some of the bread making the hole on the top larger and eat it with the filling.\n\nSome Finnish speakers today find the name kalakukko somewhat amusing, as \"kala\" is Finnish for \"fish\" and \"kukko\" is \"rooster\", leading to the oft used but non-morphological translation, \"fish cock\". However, the archaic form of \"kukko\" is derived from the same root as \"kukkaro\" (purse). \"Kukko\" also might come from a Finnish word of \"kukkula\", hill, because the dish is elevated.\n\nKalakukko obtained Traditional Speciality Guaranteed (TSG) status in Europe in 2002.\n"}
{"id": "660275", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=660275", "title": "Milan Papyrus", "text": "Milan Papyrus\n\nThe Milan Papyrus is a papyrus roll inscribed in Alexandria in the late 3rd or early 2nd century BC during the rule of the Ptolemaic dynasty. Originally discovered by anonymous tomb raiders as part of a mummy wrapping, it was purchased in the papyrus \"grey market\" in Europe in 1992 by the University of Milan. Over six hundred previously unknown lines of Greek poetry are on the roll, representing about 112 brief poems, or epigrams. Two of these were already known and had been attributed by the 12th-century AD Byzantine scholar John Tzetzes to the Hellenistic epigrammatist Posidippus of Pella (c. 310 – c. 240 BC), a Macedonian who spent his literary career in Alexandria. The initial reaction has been to attribute all the new lines to Posidippus, though Franco Ferrari suggests that there is evidence the manuscript is an anthology, in which Posidippus' epigrams predominated. \n\nAs the earliest surviving example of a Greek poetry book as well as the largest addition to the corpus of classical Greek poetry in many years, the tale of the discovery made \"The New York Times\" and \"National Geographic.\"\n\nLabelled the \"Milan papyrus,\" it was published in a scholarly edition in 2001, edited by Guido Bastianini, Claudio Gallazzi and Colin Austin. In 2002, Austin and Bastianini published a more popular edition, \"Posidippi Pellaei quae supersunt omnia\", \"all the surviving works of Posidippus of Pella\", including the epigrams of the papyrus, with Italian and English translations. Scholars have rushed to mine this new trove of highly conscious literary productions at the most sophisticated level that were created in a major center of Hellenistic culture. \n\nAfter a \"standing-room only\" discussion at the American Philological Association annual meeting in January 2001, a seminar on the Milan Papyrus was held at Harvard's Center for Hellenic Studies in April 2002, and international conferences were held at Milan, Florence and Cincinnati, in November 2002.\n\nScholarly work on the Milan Papyrus, on Posidippus, who is now revealed in a broader range of subjects, and on the Alexandrian literary epigram in general, was invigorated by the discovery and proceeds apace.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "660445", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=660445", "title": "Lomi-lomi salmon", "text": "Lomi-lomi salmon\n\nLomi salmon (more commonly known as lomi-lomi salmon) is a side dish in Hawaiian cuisine. It is a fresh tomato and salmon salad, and was introduced to Hawaiians by early Western sailors. It is typically prepared by mixing raw salted, diced salmon with tomatoes, sweet gentle Maui onions, and occasionally scallions, and sometimes crushed ice if it is not refrigerated. It is always served cold. \nThe name \"lomi-lomi salmon\" is taken from the method of preparation. The shredding (dicing) and mixing of the salmon is done by massaging the salted fish with other ingredients by hand (\"lomi-lomi\" is Hawaiian for \"to massage\").\n\nLomi-lomi salmon is a traditional side dish served at Hawaiian lū‘aus. It is said to complement traditional Hawaiian food consisting of raw diced ahi tuna, poke, kalua pig, laulau, and poi. Lomi-lomi salmon is a classic and integral part of most Hawaiian parties and gatherings, such as traditional luaus, and can be considered a Hawaiian ethnic food.\n\n"}
{"id": "661139", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=661139", "title": "Mah", "text": "Mah\n\nMångha (\"\") is the Avestan for \"Moon, month\", equivalent to Persian Māh (Old Persian \"māha\").\nIt is the name of the lunar deity in Zoroastrianism. The Iranian word is feminine, and consequently the personification of the Moon is a goddess, as in Greco-Roman tradition but in marked contrast both to Vedic religion and to her Mesopotamian predecessor Sin. Although Mah is not a prominent deity in the Avestan scripture, her crescent was an important symbol of royalty throughout the Parthian and Sassanid periods.\n\nThe Iranian word is cognate with the English \"moon\", from PIE \"*mēns\"; its equivalent is recorded as the Sanskrit for \"month\" (\"māsa\"), but not as a name of the Indo-Aryan lunar deity.\n\nAlthough there are two Avestan hymns dedicated to the Moon, she is not a prominent divinity. \nIn both the third \"Nyaish\" as well as in the seventh \"Yasht\", the 'moon' more commonly spoken of is the physical moon. In these hymns, the phases of the moon are described at length. Ahura Mazda is described to be the cause of the moon's waxing and waning, and the Amesha Spentas evenly distribute the light of the moon over the earth (\"Yasht\" 7.3, \"Nyaish\" 3.5). In \"Yasht\" 13.14-16, the Fravashis are said to be responsible for keeping the moon and stars on its appointed course. The sun, moon, and stars revolve around the peak of Hara Berezaiti (\"Yasht\" 12.25).\n\nThe Moon is however also \"bestower, radiant, glorious, possessed of water, possessed of warmth, possessed of knowledge, wealth, riches, discernment, weal, verdure, good, and the healing one\" (Dhalla, 1938:214; \"Yasht\" 7.5, \"Nyaish\" 3.7). \"During the spring, the Moon causes plants to grow up out of the earth\" (\"Yasht\" 7.4, \"Nyaish\" 3.6). In the litany to the Moon, she is described as the \"queen of the night.\"\nThe Moon is repeatedly spoken of as possessing the \"cithra\" of the primeval bull. This is an allusion to a cosmological drama that is however only properly attested in the texts of Zoroastrian tradition (see below).\n\nIn \"Histories\" 7.3.7, Herodotus states that the moon was the tutelary divinity of the Iranian expatriates residing in Asia Minor.\nThe divinity Mah appears together with Mithra on Kushan coins.\n\nIn the Zoroastrian calendar, the twelfth day of the month is dedicated to and is under the protection of the Moon.\n\nThe Moon plays a prominent role in Zoroastrian cosmogony, in particular as described in detail in the \"Bundahishn\", a text finished in the 12th century. The legend (\"Bundahishn\" 7) runs as follows: Ahriman (Av: Angra Mainyu) incites Jeh (Jahi) the primeval whore to kill the primordial bovine Gawiewdad (Av. Gavaevodata). Jeh does as told, but as the creature lies dying, the \"chihr\" is rescued and placed in the care of the moon. This \"chihr\" is then the \"prototype\" (\"karb\") of all creatures of the animal world.\n\nIn the hierarchy of \"yazata\"s, the Moon is the assistant (or 'cooperator', \"hamkar\") of Vohu Manah (MP: Bahman), the Amesha Spenta of animal welfare, in particular of cattle. The identification with Vohu Manah - the hypostasis of \"Good Purpose\" or \"Good Mind\" - is reflected in other texts where the moon is associated with mental harmony and inner peace.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "662411", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=662411", "title": "Gudeg", "text": "Gudeg\n\nGudeg is a traditional Javanese cuisine from Yogyakarta and Central Java, Indonesia. Gudeg is made from young unripe jack fruit (Javanese: \"gori\", Indonesian: \"nangka muda\") stewed for several hours with palm sugar, and coconut milk. Additional spices include garlic, shallot, candlenut, coriander seed, galangal, bay leaves, and teak leaves, the latter giving a reddish-brown color to the dish. It is often described as \"green jack fruit sweet stew\".\n\nServed solely, gudeg can be considered as a vegetarian food, since it only consists of unripe jackfruit and coconut milk. However, gudeg is commonly served with egg or chicken. Gudeg is served with white steamed rice, chicken either as \"opor ayam\" (chicken in coconut milk) or \"ayam goreng\" (fried chicken), \"telur pindang\", \"opor telur\" or just plain hard-boiled egg, tofu and/or tempeh, and \"sambel goreng krechek\" a stew made of crisp beef skins.\n\nThere are several types of gudeg; dry, wet, Yogyakarta style, Solo style and East Javanese style. Dry gudeg has only a bit of coconut milk and thus has little sauce. Wet gudeg includes more coconut milk. The most common gudeg comes from Yogyakarta, and is usually sweeter, drier and reddish in color because of the addition of teak leaves as coloring agent. Solo gudeg from the city of Surakarta is more watery and soupy, with lots of coconut milk, and is whitish in color because teak leaves are generally not added. Yogyakarta's gudeg is usually called \"red gudeg\", while Solo's gudeg is also called \"white gudeg\". The East Javanese style of gudeg has a spicier and hotter taste compared to the Yogyakarta style gudeg, which is sweeter.\n\nGudeg is traditionally associated with Yogyakarta, and Yogyakarta is sometimes nicknamed \"Kota Gudeg\" (city of gudeg). The center of Yogyakarta gudeg restaurants is in the Wijilan area to the east side of the Yogyakarta Kraton (Sultan's palace).\n\nGudeg can be packed into a \"besek\" (box made from bamboo), \"kendil\" (clay jar), or canned. Canned gudeg can last up to one year.\n\nToday, warung and restaurants serving gudeg can be found throughout Indonesian cities, such as Greater Jakarta. It is a popular dish in Javanese restaurants, and can be found in neighboring countries, such as Singapore.\n\n"}
{"id": "663000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=663000", "title": "Chipped beef", "text": "Chipped beef\n\nChipped beef is a form of pressed, salted and dried beef that has been sliced into thin pieces. Some makers smoke the dried beef for more flavor. The modern product consists of small, thin, flexible leaves of partially dried beef, generally sold compressed together in jars or flat in plastic packets. The processed meat producer Hormel once described it as \"an air-dried product that is similar to bresaola, but not as tasty.\"\n\nChipped beef is served in many diners and restaurants in the United States as a breakfast item. It is popular among the veteran community who generally refer to it as \"Shit On a Shingle\"; chipped beef in milk gravy (or \"S.O.S.\") is a common traditional meal which is served in all branches of the United States Armed Forces due to its reasonably nutritional profile, ease and speed of preparing, and relatively low cost to produce in large quantities (i.e. in quantities sufficient to properly feed an entire military outpost). Creamed chipped beef is standard fare on many such diner menus, especially in the Mid-Atlantic, but has become harder to find in chain restaurants that serve breakfast; among the restaurants still offering chipped beef on toast are Golden Corral and Silver Diner. IHOP no longer offers this on their menus, having substituted sausage gravy, and the same is true for Cracker Barrel restaurants. It is also available from companies such as Stouffer's in a frozen form which can be put on top of separately-prepared toast; it is typically quite salty. For instance, Stouffer's creamed chipped beef contains 590 mg sodium per serving. The mixture was also, at one point, available from both Freezer Queen and Banquet as \"hot sandwich toppers\"; as of late 2007, Freezer Queen no longer makes this product, and the Banquet variety is rarely found. Finally, both the Esskay Meat Company of Baltimore and Knauss Foods make a refrigerated version of creamed chipped beef which can be easily microwaved. The meat itself is also available for purchase under the Knauss and Carson's Brand names.\n\nChipped beef on toast (or creamed chipped beef on toast) is a dish comprising a white sauce and rehydrated slivers of dried beef, served on toasted bread. Hormel recommends flavoring the dish with Worcestershire sauce. Chipped beef is also often served on bagels, English muffins, biscuits, home fries, rice, mashed potato and in casserole.\n\nIn the United States, chipped beef on toast was commonly served to service members of the United States Armed Forces. It was thus considered emblematic of the military experience, much as pea soup is in Finland or Sweden. In American military slang it is commonly referred to by the dysphemism \"Shit On a Shingle\" (SOS), or \"Stew On a Shingle\", \"Same Old Stuff\", \"Something On a Shingle\", or occasionally \"Save Our Stomachs\".\n\nWentworth and Flexner cite no origin for the term, but noted \"shingle\" for slice of toast has had \"some use since 1935\" in the U.S. Army, mostly in the expression \"shit on a shingle\", and the latter had \"wide World War II Army use\".\n\n\"Chipped beef on toast (S.O.S.)\" is the title of a book of military humor. In his World War II book \"Band of Brothers\", Stephen E. Ambrose evokes the military basics:\n\nThis dish was mentioned many times on the 1970s television show \"M*A*S*H\" in the mess tent.\n\nWhile the common S.O.S. base is typically a white sauce made from a roux, a variety of meats may take the place of the chipped beef. These may include tuna, sausage, or ground beef, and may be served over toast, biscuits, or hash browns.\n\nOver the years, chipped beef has been mentioned in numerous movies and television shows. Examples include:\n\n\n"}
{"id": "663171", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=663171", "title": "Macula (planetary geology)", "text": "Macula (planetary geology)\n\nMacula (pl. \"maculae\") is the Latin word for 'spot'. It is used in planetary nomenclature to refer to unusually dark areas on the surface of a planet or moon. They are seen on the icy surfaces of Pluto, Jupiter's moon Europa, Saturn's moon Titan, Neptune's moon Triton, and Pluto's moon Charon. The term was adopted for planetary nomenclature when high resolution pictures of Europa revealed unusual new surface features.\n\n"}
{"id": "665804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=665804", "title": "Muster (Texas A&amp;M University)", "text": "Muster (Texas A&amp;M University)\n\nAggie Muster is a tradition at Texas A&M University which celebrates the camaraderie of the school while remembering the lives of Aggies who have died, specifically those in the past year. Muster officially began on April 21, 1903, as a day for remembrance of fellow Aggies. Muster ceremonies today take place in approximately 320 locations globally. The largest muster ceremony occurs in Reed Arena, on the Texas A&M campus. The \"Roll Call for the Absent\" commemorates Aggies, alumni and current students, who died that year. Aggies light candles, and friends and families of Aggies who died that year answer “here” when the name of their loved one is “called”. Campus muster also serves as a 50th-year class reunion for the corresponding graduating class. Some non-campus muster ceremonies do not include the pageantry of the campus ceremony, and might consist simply of a barbecue.\n\nOn June 26, 1883, alumni of Texas A&M University gathered together to \"live over again their college days, the victories and defeats won and lost upon the drill field and in the classroom.\" The same year, the Ex-Cadets Association established the \"Roll Call for the Absent\". The event grew into a loosely organized annual tradition, but did not have a permanent date set aside until several decades later, when it merged with a different tradition.\n\nIn 1889, Texas A&M administrators declared that April 21 (which in Texas is known as San Jacinto Day, the anniversary of the Battle of San Jacinto whereby Texas gained its independence from Mexico) would be an official school holiday. Each year on San Jacinto Day, the cadets would have a track and field competition. In 1903, then-A&M President Davis Houston encountered much student resistance to the idea of cancelling the holiday. Houston agreed to retain the holiday as long as the students promised to use it for constructive purposes.\n\nBeginning April 21, 1903, the tradition of Aggie Muster merged with the Texas Independence celebration, featuring athletic events and banquets to honor alumni; many alumni would attend. For the next 15 years, the event would occur unchanged as a day of play, celebration, and fellowship. In 1918, though, with many alumni away involved in World War I and unable to return to campus, A&M President Bizzell encouraged alumni and the student body to gather wherever they were on April 21, becoming the first Aggie administrator to officially support the tradition.\n\nIn the early 1920s, as Aggies returned from the war and settled throughout Texas, regional A&M clubs formed to reunite alumni. With the proliferation of these groups, the Muster tradition began to have a more formal atmosphere. In 1923, the student radio station WTAW broadcast a statewide program for over two dozen Aggie groups who had gathered at points across Texas. The March 1923 \"Texas Aggie\" urged, \"If there is an A&M man in one-hundred miles of you, you are expected to get together, eat a little, and live over the days you spent at the A&M College of Texas.\"\n\nThe tradition of reading aloud the roll call of the dead began in 1924, with the addition of the song \"Taps\" in 1927. The following year, 23 alumni were added to the roll call. During the Great Depression, Aggies continued to celebrate April 21, calling it \"A. and M. Day\", and using the gathering to help raise money to support students and alumni, as well as advancing a job-placement plan.\n\nThe most well-known Aggie Muster took place during World War II in 1942 on the Philippine island of Corregidor. At this time, Corregidor was the last American stronghold against the Japanese forces in the Philippines, and Japanese artillery and warplanes were constantly attacking. An estimated 1.8 million pounds of shells pounded the island in one five-hour stretch. The American artillery commander on Corregidor was Brigadier General George F. Moore, a 1908 graduate of Texas A&M. With the help of Major Tom Dooley, class of 1935, Moore gathered the names of 25 other Aggies under his command. Despite the fierce fighting as the Japanese laid siege to the island, on April 21, 1942, Moore held a roll call—known as muster in army terms—calling the names of each of the Aggies under his command.\n\nOnly 12 of the 25 survived the battle and the POW camps to which the survivors were sent. Dooley told a United Press correspondent about the gathering, and the reporter sent an article back to the USA about the 25 Aggies who had \"Mustered\". The story captured the imagination of the country and \"helped boost American spirits at a time a lift was badly needed.\" Lt. Col. (Ret.) William A. Hamilton, Jr., Class of 1940, recognized as the last living survivor of the \"Muster on the Rock\", died on January 4, 2018, at age 99.\n\nAssociation of Former Students Executive Secretary E. E. McQuillen, Class of 1920, is given credit for refocusing San Jacinto Day as a remembrance for fallen Aggies. He changed the April 21, 1943, celebration to be the first known as an Aggie Muster and sent packets to each A&M club, Aggie Moms club, and to military bases around the world with a detailed program of events for April 21. It included greetings from the A&M President and the Muster Poem. The response was overwhelming, with 10,000 Aggies worldwide mustering in 500 locations. The following year, McQuillen added a list of recently deceased Aggies to the packets, asking each local group to choose names from the list and call them aloud during their ceremony, and \"as each name is called a comrade will answer 'Here'.\"\n\nIn April 1945, just eight weeks after Corregidor had been recaptured by the Allies, three Aggies conducted a Muster \"on the Rock\". They wrote letters home to McQuillen to let him know about their impromptu Muster. A year later, on April 21, 1946, an even larger Muster occurred on Corregidor. With the war now over, A&M held a special Victory Homecoming Muster on Easter morning in 1946. Over 15 thousand Aggies gathered at Kyle Field to listen to a speech by General Dwight D. Eisenhower. Lt. Col. Tom Dooley also presented the \"Muster Tradition\" and conducted a WWII Roll Call. To represent the 900 Aggies who died in World War II, the names of the four deceased WWII Aggie Medal of Honor recipients were called.\n\nMuster became a student organization in 1950, and students now coordinate all aspects of the campus Muster in College Station, Texas.\n\nRandy Matson, the keynote speaker at the 2000 campus Muster, vowed, \"we're here (tonight) to pledge that none of you will be forgotten as long as there are two Aggies left in the world.\"\n\nThe largest Muster each year, with over 12,000 in attendance, is held in Reed Arena on the campus of Texas A&M University in College Station. This campus Muster is dedicated to the 50-year reunion class of that year, demonstrating unity among Aggies. During the day, a Camaraderie Barbecue is held at the Academic Plaza around noon to rekindle the spirit of the original Muster celebration. The evening Muster ceremony begins with a keynote speaker. Several poems are read, including \"The Last Corps Trip\", which imagines a Judgement Day in which Aggies are welcomed into heaven with open arms. Following the readings, the room is darkened for the Roll Call of the Absent. This Roll Call honors Aggies who have died since the last Muster. As the names are called, a family member or friend answers \"Here\", and lights a candle in remembrance of that person. Following the Roll Call, the Ross Volunteers give a 21-gun salute, and buglers play \"Silver Taps\", an especially evocative version of the military's mournful melody of farewell.\n\nSmaller Musters are held in over 300 other locations, including in Kosovo, Germany, Istanbul, Seoul, and almost every county in Texas. Names can be called at multiple Muster ceremonies. For example, a person may be honored at the Muster in his hometown, while the Muster in the town where his parents live may also choose to call his name. Most of the smaller Musters do not have the pageantry of the campus Muster. In all cases, a Roll Call for the Absent is held, but the ceremony may take place in conjunction with a barbecue or fish fry, to allow for fellowship.\n\nIn 2018, a Sunrise Muster has been added to the Campus Muster activities. In addition to the traditional muster activities, the name of every Aggie that passed away in the previous year, worldwide that year is read at the Clayton W. Williams Jr. Alumni Center at 6:51 AM. This is to insure that every Aggie that passed away in the previous year will have someone say \"here\" for them. The whole event is streamed live on AggieNetwork.com.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "666553", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=666553", "title": "Cucumber sandwich", "text": "Cucumber sandwich\n\nThe traditional cucumber sandwich is composed of paper-thin slices of cucumber placed between two thin slices of crustless, lightly buttered bread.\n\nThe traditional cucumber sandwich originated in the UK and is made with white bread. Modern variants (largely of US origin) exist, involving cream cheese, chopped dill or spices, brown bread, salmon, and even bread with crusts left intact. One specific US variant includes benedictine, a green soft spread based on cucumbers and cream cheese.\n\nCucumber sandwiches are most often served for a light snack or at afternoon tea, a formal light meal served at four in the afternoon or early evening before the main supper. In addition, cucumber sandwiches can be served in the tea break at club cricket matches in England. \n\nBecause of cucumber's cooling nature, cucumber sandwiches are often eaten in the summer months or in warmer climates, such as in parts of India. Because of English influence on Indian culture, cucumber sandwiches are popular during cricket matches and weekend picnics. The Indian variant is flavoured with green chutney and sometimes contains slices of boiled potatoes. Until its demise in 2011, Indian Airlines used to serve cucumber sandwiches as part of its usual vegetarian inflight meal in short-haul domestic flights.\n\nCucumber sandwiches formed an integral part of the stereotypical afternoon tea affair. (By contrast, people of the era's lower working classes were thought to prefer a coarser but more satisfying protein-filled sandwich, in a \"meat tea\" that might substitute for supper.)\n\nSome writers have attempted to draw out an association between the daintiness of the sandwich and the perceived effeteness of the UK's aristocracy. Cucumber sandwiches are often used as a kind of shorthand in novels and films to identify upper-class people, occasionally in a derogatory manner. In the first act of Oscar Wilde's \"The Importance of Being Earnest\" (1895), cucumber sandwiches that have expressly been ordered and prepared for Lady Bracknell's expected visit are all voraciously eaten beforehand by her nephew and host, Algernon Moncrieff; consequently he is forced to tell a little lie, with his butler's connivance: namely that \"there were no cucumbers in the market this morning... not even for ready money\". In addition, the sandwiches were once considered appropriate delicacies to offer to visiting clergy, in times when such visits were still a common feature of English middle class life.\n\nIn the James Bond film \"Moonraker\", Hugo Drax asks James Bond, \"may I press you to a cucumber sandwich?\"\n\nThe popularity of the cucumber sandwich reached its upper-class zenith in the Edwardian era, when cheap labour and plentiful coal enabled cucumbers to be produced in hotbeds under glass through most of the year. With the declining popularity of tea as a meal in the United Kingdom, there was a corresponding decline in the popularity of cucumber sandwiches, but they are still frequently served at teas, luncheons, and gatherings. Most English cricket clubs supply malt vinegar and ground pepper to dash inside the sandwich, and this is the simplest form commonly used in England.\n\nAs the thinness of the bread is a point of pride in the kitchen, a dense-textured white Pullman loaf is cut with a wide-bladed knife, which guides the cut; daylight should pass through the resulting fine pores. The peel of the cucumber is either removed or scored lengthwise with a fork before the cucumber is sliced. The slices of bread are carefully buttered all the way to the edges in the thinnest coating, which is only to prevent the bread from becoming damp with cucumber juice, and the slices of cucumber, which have been dashed with salt and lemon juice, are placed in the sandwich just before serving in order to prevent the sandwich from becoming damp enough to moisten the eater's fingers. The crusts of the bread are cut away cleanly, creating tea sandwiches.\n"}
{"id": "667279", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=667279", "title": "Gaiden", "text": "Gaiden\n\nWorks whose titles contain the word \"gaiden\" include \"Saiyuki Gaiden\" (prequel to Son Goku's past), \"Fire Emblem Gaiden\", \"Ten no Haō Hokuto no Ken Raō Gaiden\" (spin-off of \"Fist of the North Star\", which is told through the eyes of Kenshiro's brother, Raoh) or \"\" (released in English as \"Albert Odyssey: Legend of Eldean\"). The word \"gaiden\" has been used in English titles as well, such as \"Ninja Gaiden\" (literally \"Ninja's Tale\", the American title for the Japanese series \"Ninja Ryūkenden\") and \"Resident Evil Gaiden\" (a European-developed spin-off of the Japanese \"Resident Evil\" franchise), \"Super Robot Taisen Alpha Gaiden\", and \"\". The Nintendo 64 game \"\" was called \"Zelda Gaiden\" or during its initial development.\n\nFilms such as \"Battle Royale\" use the term \"gaiden\" to refer to supplementary or additional works.\n\nIn anime, examples include \"Darker Than Black: Gaiden\", an OVA released as a prequel to the events of the second season of the show.\n\n"}
{"id": "667990", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=667990", "title": "Über", "text": "Über\n\nÜber (, sometimes written uber in English-language publications) is a German language word meaning \"over\", \"above\" or \"across\". It is an etymological twin with German \"ober\", and is cognate (through Proto-Germanic) with English \"over\", Dutch \"over\", Swedish \"över\" and Icelandic \"yfir\", among other Germanic languages; it is distantly cognate to Sanskrit word \"upari\" and Hindi \"uper\" (both meaning 'above', 'over' or 'up') probably through Proto-Indo-European. The word is relatively well-known within Anglophone communities due to its occasional use as a hyphenated prefix in informal English, usually for emphasis. The German word is properly spelled with an umlaut, while the spelling of the English loanword varies.\n\nIn German, \"über\" is a preposition, as well as being used as a prefix. Both uses indicate a state or action involving increased elevation or quantity in the physical sense, or superiority or excess in the abstract.\n\nAs a preposition, \"über\"s meaning depends on its context. For example, \"über etwas sprechen\" – to speak about something, \"über die Brücke\" – across the bridge.\n\n\"Über\" also translates to \"over\", \"above\", \"meta\", but mainly in compound words. The actual translation depends on context. One example would be Nietzsche's term \"Übermensch\", discussed below; another example is the Deutschlandlied, which begins with the well-known words \"Deutschland, Deutschland über alles\" meaning \"Germany, Germany above everything\" (this stanza is not sung anymore, because it is mistaken as meaning \"Germany above the rest of the world\"; its original meaning was the German nation above its constituent states [Prussia, Hanover, Württemberg etc.]).\n\nThe German word \"unter\", meaning \"beneath\" or \"under\", is antonymous to \"über\". \"Unter\" can be found in words such as U-Bahn (\"Untergrundbahn\" – underground (rail-)way), U-Boot (\"Unterseeboot\" – submarine), as well as toponyms, such as Unter den Linden.\n\nGrammatically, \"über\" belongs to that set of German prepositions that can govern either the accusative case or the dative case (\"\"an, auf, hinter, in, neben, über, unter, vor, zwischen\"\"). The choice is determined by whether the prepositional phrase indicates movement (accusative) or an unmoving state (dative).\n\nThe crossover of the term \"über\" from German into English goes back to the work of German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche. In 1883, Nietzsche coined the term \"Übermensch\" to describe the higher state to which he felt men might aspire. The term was brought into English by George Bernard Shaw in the title to his 1903 play \"Man and Superman\". During his rise to power, Adolf Hitler adopted Nietzsche's term, using it in his descriptions of an Aryan master race. It was in this context that American Jewish comic book creator Jerry Siegel encountered the term and conceived the 1933 story \"The Reign of the Superman\", in which the superman (not to be confused with his later superhero character) is \"an evil mastermind with advanced mental powers\". Shortly afterward, Siegel and artist Joseph Shuster recast Superman into the iconic American hero he subsequently became. It is through this association with the superhero that the term \"über\" carries much of its English sense implying irresistibility or invincibility.\n\nThe normal transliteration of the \"ü\" ('u' with an umlaut) when used in writing systems without diacritics (such as airport arrival boards, older computer systems, etc.) is \"ue\", not just \"u\". Because of different usage, the English language version of the word is distinct from \"über\". It is not possible to translate every English \"uber\" back into \"über\": for example, \"uber-left\" could not be translated into \"Überlinks\": a Germanophone would say \"linksaußen\" (\"outside left\").\n\n\n"}
{"id": "668147", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=668147", "title": "Hellenization", "text": "Hellenization\n\nHellenization or Hellenisation is the historical spread of ancient Greek culture, religion and, to a lesser extent, language, over foreign peoples conquered by Greeks or brought into their sphere of influence, particularly during the Hellenistic period following the campaigns of Alexander the Great in the fourth century BC. The result of Hellenization was that elements of Greek origin combined in various forms and degrees with local elements; these Greek influences spread from the Mediterranean basin as far east as modern-day Pakistan. In modern times, Hellenization has been associated with the adoption of modern Greek culture and the ethnic and cultural homogenization of Greece.\n\nThe first known use of verb \"to Hellenize\" (ἑλληνίζειν) is by Thucydides, who wrote that the Amphilochian Argives were linguistically Hellenized by the Ambraciots. It is also used in 2 Maccabees and the Book of Acts The precise meaning is disputed but scholars believe the meaning of the word was not limited to \"Greek-speaking\".\n\nBy the 4th century BC the process of Hellenization had started in southwestern Anatolia's Lycia, Caria and Pisidia regions. (1st century fortifications at Pelum in Galatia, on Baş Dağ in Lycaonia and at Isaura are the only known Hellenistic-style structures in central and eastern Anatolia).\nWhen it was advantageous to do so, places like Side and Aspendos invented Greek-themed origin myths; an inscription published in SEG shows that in the 4th century BC Aspendos claimed ties to Argos, similar to Nikokreon of Cyprus who also claimed Argive lineage. (Argos was home to the Kings of Macedon.) Like the Argeads, the Antigonids claimed descent from Heracles, the Seleucids from Apollo, and the Ptolemies from Dionysus.\nThe Seuthopolis inscription was very influential in the modern study of Thrace. The inscription mentions Dionysus, Apollo and some Samothracian gods. Scholars have interpreted the inscription as evidence of Hellenization in inland Thrace during the early Hellenisitc, but this has been challenged by recent scholarship.\n\nHellenization, however, had its limitations. For example, areas of southern Syria that were affected by Greek culture entailed mostly Seleucid urban centres, where Greek was commonly spoken. The countryside, on the other hand, was largely unaffected, with most of its inhabitants speaking Syriac and clinging to their native traditions.\n\nArchaeological evidence alone gives only an incomplete picture of Hellenization; it is often not possible to state with certainty whether particular archaeological findings belonged to Greeks, Hellenized indigenous peoples, indigenous people who simply owned Greek-style objects or some combination of these groups. Thus, literary sources are also used to help researchers interpret archaeological findings.\n\nIn 1909, a commission appointed by the Greek government reported that a third of the villages of Greece should have their names changed, often because of their non-Greek origin. In other instances, names were changed from a contemporary name of Greek origin to the ancient Greek name. Some village names were formed from a Greek root word with a foreign suffix or vice versa. Most of the name changes took place in areas populated by ethnic Greeks in which a strata of foreign or divergent toponyms had accumulated over the centuries. However, in some parts of northern Greece, the population was not Greek-speaking, and many of the former toponyms had reflected the diverse ethnic and linguistic origins of their inhabitants.\n\nThe process of the change of toponyms in modern Greece has been described as a process of Hellenization. A modern use is in connection with policies pursuing \"cultural harmonization and education of the linguistic minorities resident within the modern Greek state\" (the Hellenic Republic): the Hellenization of minority groups in modern Greece. The term Hellenisation (or Hellenization) is also used in the context of Greek opposition to the use of the Macedonian language in the Greek province of Macedonia\n\nIn 1870, the Greek government abolished all Italian schools in the Ionian islands, which had been annexed to Greece six years earlier. That led to the diminution of the community of Corfiot Italians, which had lived in Corfu since the Middle Ages; by the 1940s, there were only 400 Corfiot Italians left.\n\nHellenization reached Pisidia and Lycia sometime in the 4th century BC, but the interior remained largely unaffected for several more centuries until it came under Roman rule in the 1st century BC. Ionian, Aeolian and Doric settlers along Anatolia's Western coast seemed to have remained culturally Greek and some of their city-states date back to the Archaic Period. On the other hand, Greeks who settled in the southwestern region of Pisidia and Pamphylia seem to have been assimilated by the local culture.\n\nPanticapaeum (modern day Kerch) was one of the early Greek colonies in Crimea. It was founded by Miletus around 600 BC on a site with good terrain for a defensive acropolis. By the time the Cimmerian colonies had organized into the Bosporan Kingdom around much of the local native population had been Hellenized. Most scholars date the establishment of the kingdom to 480 BC, when the Archaeanactid dynasty assumed control of Panticapaeum, but classical archaeologist Gocha R. Tsetskhladze has dated the kingdom's founding to 436 BC, when the Spartocid dynasty replaced the ruling Archaeanactids.\n\nThe Hellenistic Seleucid and Ptolemaic kingdoms that formed after Alexander's death were particularly relevant to the history of Judaism. Located between the two kingdoms, Israel experienced long periods of warfare and instability. Judea fell under Seleucid control in 198 BC. By the time Antiochus IV Epiphanes became king of Judea in 175 BC, Jerusalem was already somewhat Hellenized. In 170 BC, both claimants to the High Priesthood, Jason and Menelaus, bore Greek names. Jason had established institutions of Greek education and in later years Jewish culture started to be suppressed including forbidding circumcision and observance of the Sabbath.\n\nHellenization of members of the Jewish elite included names, clothes but other customs were adapted by the rabbis and elements that violated the halakha and midrash were prohibited. One example is the elimination of some aspects of Hellenistic banquets such as the practice of offering libations to the gods, while incorporating certain elements that gave the meals a more Jewish character. Discussion of Scripture, the singing of sacred songs and attendance of students of the Torah was encouraged. One detailed account of Jewish-style Hellenistic banquets comes from Ben Sira. There is literary evidence from Philo about the extravagance of Alexandrian Jewish banquets and \"The Letter of Aristeas\" discusses Jews dining with non-Jews as an opportunity to share Jewish wisdom.\n\nPamphylia is a plain located between the highlands of Lycia and Cilicia. The exact date of Greek settlement in the region is not known; one possible theory is that settlers arrived in the region as part of Bronze Age maritime trade between the Aegean, Levant and Cyprus, while another attributes it to population movements during the instability of the Bronze Age Collapse. The Greek dialect established in Pamphylia by the Classical period was related to Arcado-Cypriot.\n\nMopsus is a legendary founder of several coastal cities in southwestern Anatolia, including Aspendos, Phaselis, Perge and Sillyon. A bilingual Phoenician and neo-Hittite Luwian inscription found at Karatepe, dated to 800 BC, says that the ruling dynasty there traced their origins to Mopsus. Mopsus, whose name is also attested to in Hittite documents, may originally have been an Anatolian figure that became part of the cultural traditions of Pamphylia's early Greek settlers. Attested to in Linear B texts, he is given a Greek genealogy as a descendent of Manto and Apollo.\n\nFor centuries the indigenous population exerted considerable influence on Greek settlers, but after the 4th century BC this population quickly started to become Hellenized. Very little is known about Pisidia prior to the 3rd century, but there is quite a bit of archeological evidence that dates to the Hellenistic period. Literary evidence, however, including inscriptions and coins are limited. During the 3rd and 2nd centuries, native regional tongues were abandoned in favor of koine Greek and settlements began to take on characteristics of Greek \"polis\".\n\nThe Iron Age Panemoteichos I may be an early precursor to later regional Hellenistic settlements including Selge, Termessos and Sagalssos (believed to be the three most prominent cities of Hellenistic Pisidia). The site is evidence of \"urban organization\" that predates the Greek \"polis\" by 500 years. Based on Panemoteichos I and other Iron Age sites, including the Phrygian Midas şehri and the Cappadocian fortification of Kerkenes, experts believe that \"behind the Greek influence that shaped the Hellenistic Pisidian communities there lay a tangible and important Anatolian tradition.\"\n\nAccording to the writings of Arrian the population of Side, who traced their origins to Aeolian Cyme, had forgotten the Greek language by the time Alexander arrived at the city in 334 BC. There are coins and stone inscriptions that attest to a unique script from the region but the language has only been partially deciphered.\n\nThe latest dateable coins found at the Phrygian capital of Gordion are from the 2nd century BC. Finds from the abandoned Hellenistic era settlement include imported and locally produced imitation Greek-style terracotta figurines and ceramics. Inscriptions show that some of the inhabitants had Greek names, while others had Anatolian or possibly Celtic names.\nMany Phrygian cult objects were Hellenized during the Hellenistic period, but worship of traditional deities like the Phrygian mother goddess persisted. Greek cults attested to include Hermes, Kybele, the Muses and Tyche.\n\nGreek art and culture reached Phoenicia by way of commerce before any Greek cities were founded in Syria. but Hellenization of Syrians in not widespread until it becomes a Roman province . Under Roman rule in the 1st century BC there is evidence of Hellenistic style funerary architecture, decorative elements, mythological references, and inscriptions. However, there is a lack of evidence from Hellenistic Syria; concerning this most scholars view it as a case of \"absence of evidence is not evidence of absence\".\n\nThe Bactrians, an Iranian ethnic group who lived in Bactria (northern Afghanistan), were Hellenized during the reign of the Greco-Bactrian Kingdom and soon after various tribes in northwestern regions of the Indian subcontinent underwent Hellenization during the reign of the Indo-Greek Kingdom.\n\nThe periodization of the Hellenistic Age, between the conquests of Alexander the Great up to Octavians victory at the Battle of Actium, has been attributed to the 19th-century historian J. G. Droysen. According to this model the spread of Greek culture spread during this period made the rise of Christianity possible. Later, in the 20th century, scholars questioned this 19th-century paradigm for failing to account for the contributions of Semitic and other Near Eastern cultures.\n\nThe twentieth century witnessed a lively debate over the extent of Hellenization in the Levant, particularly among the ancient Jews, which has continued until today. Interpretations on the rise of Early Christianity, which was applied most famously by Rudolf Bultmann, used to see Judaism as largely unaffected by Hellenism, and the Judaism of the diaspora was thought to have succumbed thoroughly to its influences. Bultmann thus argued that Christianity arose almost completely within those Hellenistic confines and should be read against that background, as opposed to a more traditional Jewish background. With the publication of Martin Hengel's two-volume study \"Hellenism and Judaism\" (1974, German original 1972) and subsequent studies \"Jews, Greeks and Barbarians: Aspects of the Hellenisation of Judaism in the pre-Christian Period\" (1980, German original 1976) and \"The 'Hellenisation' of Judaea in the First Century after Christ\" (1989, German original 1989), the tide began to turn decisively. Hengel argued that virtually all of Judaism was highly Hellenized well before the beginning of the Christian era, and even the Greek language was well known throughout the cities and even the smaller towns of Jewish Palestine. Scholars have continued to nuance Hengel's views, but almost all believe that strong Hellenistic influences were throughout the Levant, even among the conservative Jewish communities, which were the most nationalistic.\n\nIn his introduction to the 1964 book \"Meditations\", Anglican priest Maxwell Staniforth discussed the profound influence of Stoic philosophy on Christianity:\n\nAgain in the doctrine of the Trinity, the ecclesiastical conception of Father, Word, and Spirit finds its germ in the different Stoic names of the Divine Unity. Thus Seneca, writing of the supreme Power which shapes the universe, states, 'This Power we sometimes call the All-ruling God, sometimes the incorporeal Wisdom, sometimes the holy Spirit, sometimes Destiny.' The Church had only to reject the last of these terms to arrive at its own acceptable definition of the Divine Nature; while the further assertion 'these three are One', which the modern mind finds paradoxical, was no more than commonplace to those familiar with Stoic notions.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "668282", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=668282", "title": "George Dickel", "text": "George Dickel\n\nGeorge Dickel is a brand of Tennessee whiskey owned by Diageo PLC produced in Cascade Hollow, Tennessee. The brand was introduced in 1964. Its distillery is part of the American Whiskey Trail and offers tours to the public. A George Dickel rye whiskey is also sold.\n\nThe brand's labels use the traditional Scottish spelling of \"whisky\", as opposed to \"whiskey\", although the latter spelling is more common in American English. According to the company, this is because Dickel believed his product to be as smooth and high in quality as the best Scotch whiskies.\n\nSix whiskies are produced under the George Dickel brand: \n\nGeorge A. Dickel was born in Germany in 1818, and immigrated to the United States in 1844. He founded a retail business in Nashville, Tennessee, in the 1850s, and began selling liquor in 1861. After the Civil War, he operated a liquor store on South College Street in Nashville. In the late 1860s, he founded George A. Dickel and Company, a wholesaling firm which bought whiskey from regional distillers and distributed it in barrels, jugs and bottles. In 1871, Meier Saltzkotter, who had worked as a superintendent for Dickel, became a partner in the company. Victor Emmanuel Shwab (1847–1924), a brother-in-law of Dickel who had initially worked for the company as a bookkeeper, became a partner in 1881.\n\nWhiskey was being produced in Cascade Hollow, near Tullahoma, Tennessee, by John F. Brown and F.E. Cunningham in the 1870s. In 1879, Matthew Sims, a local businessman, bought Brown's share of the operation. In 1883, another local businessman, McLin Davis (1852–1898), joined the partnership. Davis became the operation's distiller, and is credited with the whiskey's recipe. By the early 1890s, Cascade Whisky was one of the more popular brands in the region. The Cascade label included the phrase, \"Mellow as Moonlight\", which was rooted in Davis's method of cooling mash at night.\nFollowing an accident in 1886, Dickel's health declined, and Shwab gradually took control of the wholesaling firm's daily operations. In 1888, Shwab purchased Sims's share of the Cascade Distillery, whose whiskey Dickel and Company had been selling for years. The terms of the purchase made Dickel and Company the sole distributor of Cascade. Shwab also purchased the popular Climax Saloon in Nashville, and afterward advertised the saloon as the \"headquarters\" of Cascade Whisky. After Davis's death in 1898, his son, Norman Davis, briefly ran the distillery, but was sued by Shwab and forced to sell his share in the operation.\n\nFollowing Dickel's death in 1894, his share of Dickel and Company was willed to his wife, Augusta. Though he had advised her to sell out, she retained her share of the company, but did not participate in its operations. Upon her death in 1916, she willed her share to Shwab.\n\nThroughout the early 1900s, Shwab fought vehemently against the rising calls for prohibition, spending thousands of dollars on lobbying campaigns in Nashville, and thwarting legislation aimed at curtailing the sale of alcohol on at least one occasion. In spite of his efforts, Tennessee enacted prohibition in 1910, forcing the Cascade operation to relocate to the Stitzel Distillery in Louisville, Kentucky. It was produced here until Kentucky enacted statewide prohibition in 1917. The operation shut down altogether with the onset of nationwide prohibition in 1920.\n\nIn 1933, national prohibition was repealed. Four years later, Shwab's heirs sold the Cascade brand to the Schenley Distilling Company. The recipe had never been written down, and had to be obtained from two former distillers at the Cascade Hollow site. In the 1940s and 1950s, Schenley's product, produced at the OFC Distillery in Frankfort, Kentucky, was marketed as \"Geo. A. Dickel's Cascade Kentucky Straight Bourbon Whisky\".\n\nIn 1956, Schenley attempted to buy the Jack Daniel's brand. After its offer was refused, Schenley decided instead to return one of their own brands to its roots and compete against Jack Daniel's. In 1958, after the passage of enabling legislation making it legal to produce liquor in Coffee County, Tennessee, Schenley's Ralph Dupps reconstructed the Cascade Hollow distillery. The new distillery is located about a mile from the old distillery site, but still utilizes the waters of Cascade Branch and the Lincoln County Process for mellowing. The first mash was produced at the new distillery on July 4, 1959, and George Dickel Tennessee Whisky was first bottled in 1964. Schenley opted to use George Dickel's name as the trademark because of Cascade's reputation as a value brand. Schenley shut down the Tennessee bottling operation in the 1980s, and the whiskey has since been hauled in tanker trucks for bottling elsewhere. Various mergers and buyouts have resulted in Diageo owning the Dickel brand. \n\nIncreased production of George Dickel in the 1990s caused supply to exceed demand. In response, the distillery closed to allow the whiskey's value to rebound and mitigate some wastewater issues at the distillery. The original site of the George Dickel distillery at the south end of Cascade Hollow was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1994. The distillery reopened in 2003, almost too late to prevent a shortage of Old No. 8 in the market by 2007. Diageo introduced a younger, three-year-old version branded \"Old-Fashioned Cascade Hollow Batch Recipe\" to meet demand. It was discontinued in 2013, after aged stocks rebounded sufficiently.\n\n\"George Dickel Rye\", introduced in 2012, is the only Dickel product not produced at the Cascade Hollow Distillery. It is produced under contract by MGP Indiana in Lawrenceburg, Indiana, and is mashed, distilled and aged there before being trucked to the Diageo facility in Plainfield, Illinois, for charcoal filtering and bottling. \n\nIn early 2014, Diageo introduced a Dickel \"No. 1 Foundation Recipe\", using an unaged version of its standard mashbill of more than 80% corn, allowing for its sale as \"corn whiskey\". Also around 2014, a new bottling line was installed at the distillery.\n\nFrom 2005 to 2015, Cascade Distillery operated under the supervision of Master Distiller John Lunn. In March 2015, the company announced Lunn was leaving to become the master distiller for Popcorn Sutton microdistillery. Nicole Austin took over as general manager and distiller of Cascade Hollow Distilling Co. in March 2018. Prior to joining the Dickel team, she spent two years in Ireland serving as Tullamore D.E.W.'s commissioning engineer at its grain distillery in Offaly. Austin began her distilling career in 2010 as a master blender for Kings County Distillery.\n\nFood critic Morgan Murphy said \"Distilled twice, the white dog [No. 1 Foundation Recipe] at Dickel is chilled then filtered through wool blankets and maple sugar charcoal before it is put into the barrel and the result is smooth, sweet (but not overly so), and peppery.\"\n\nIn 2015, several George Dickel brands won awards at the 15th Annual San Francisco World Spirits Competition. George Dickel No. 12 was named \"Best Tennessee Whiskey\" and won a double gold medal. George Dickel Rye Whisky also won double gold, while George Dickel Barrel Select Tennessee Whisky earned a gold designation.\n\n"}
{"id": "670648", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=670648", "title": "Red Stripe", "text": "Red Stripe\n\nRed Stripe is a 4.7% ABV pale lager brewed by Desnoes & Geddes in Jamaica. It was first introduced in 1928 from a recipe developed by Paul H. Geddes, and Bill Martindale. It is brewed under license in the UK and USA. In 1993, Guinness Brewing Worldwide, now Diageo, acquired a controlling interest in Desnoes & Geddes, and took over international distribution in many markets. In 2015, Heineken acquired Diageo's stake and stated it would launch an offer for the shares it did not own.\n\nRed Stripe was first produced in the early 1930s by the Galena Brewing Company in Galena, Illinois. The company sold the recipe to British investors after facing financial troubles. The investors brought the brand and recipe to Jamaica. Red Stripe was brewed under license in the UK from Desnoes and Geddes by the Bedford-based brewers, Charles Wells from 1976 until 2014, when Diageo made alternative supply arrangements. \n\nIn 1985, the brand was first imported to the United States. In 1993, 51 percent ownership in Desnoes & Geddes Limited was purchased by Guinness Brewing Worldwide, now Diageo, an acquisition that significantly increased the international distribution of both Red Stripe and Dragon Stout. A new Red Stripe Light has also been added which is brewed and bottled in Jamaica and imported by Guinness in Stamford, Connecticut.\n\nIn 1985, the brand was first imported to the United States with poor initial results. With an eye towards the success of Heineken, Red Stripe for export was packaged in green standard bottles. American consumers exposed to Red Stripe through their travels to Jamaica as well as Jamaican expatriates were reluctant to try the brand in the States since it was not packaged in its distinctive squat brown bottle and painted label. This marketing issue was resolved only to have shipments temporarily suspended in January 1989 due to cannabis smuggling in shipping containers discovered in the Port of Miami. Red Stripe recovered and rode the popularity of dance hall and reggae in the early 1990s to well over a million cases of annual distribution. Red Stripe is a significant sponsor of reggae, ska, and other music events, including the annual Reggae Sumfest hosted in Montego Bay. \n\nDiageo introduced canned Red Stripe, brewed under contract by Moosehead in New Brunswick, Canada, to the United States market in 2009. \n\nIn the U.S. in 2010, the bottling size was reduced from a typical 12 oz. per serving to 11.2 oz. per serving which is equivalent to the typical metric serving of 0.33L.\n\nIn 2012, Diageo moved production of the U.S. supply of Red Stripe from Jamaica to the U.S.; The supply is produced by City Brewing Co. in La Crosse, Wisconsin and the Latrobe Brewing Company in Latrobe, Pennsylvania, which was the main brewery for Rolling Rock for over 60 years. Desnoes & Geddes will still make Red Stripe for Jamaica, Brazil, Canada and Europe.\n\nOn September 7, 2016 the company celebrated the shipment of the first container of Red Stripe to be exported to the United States from Jamaica in 4 years. The company says this historic move is core to the company's mission of re-establishing Jamaica as the global hub for the iconic Jamaican brand.\n\nIn North America, a television advertising campaign launched in 2001 features Dorrel Salmon playing a comedic take on a Jamaican man, using variations on the catch phrase, \"Hooray, beer!\" In the UK, the advertising campaign plays on the 'easy vibe' of Jamaican Beer, with catch phrases such as \"easy now.\"\n\nRed Stripe has been an intermittent sponsor of the Jamaica national bobsled team. In February 2018, following turmoil within the Jamaica Olympic women’s bobsled team, Red Stripe stepped in at the last minute to sponsor a new bobsled so that the team could compete in the Pyeongchang 2018 Olympics as planned.\n\nOther major sporting sponsorship activities have included a commitment as the Caribbean regional sponsor for the 2007 Cricket World Cup and a J$100 million sponsorship commitment to the Jamaican Football Federation in support of the national team's regional qualifying efforts for the 2010 FIFA World Cup.\n\nIn 2007, under the guidance of brand manager Jonny Kirkham, Red Stripe initiated a campaign in the UK to support new music by sponsoring events such as the Camden Crawl and The Great Escape festivals, as well as hosting a number of free music events with artists such as The View and The Rifles. Recent work with new bands puts this initiative in direct competition with the likes of Carling as a featured sponsor of the underground music scene. In support of this promotional strategy, the Red Stripe Music Awards were initiated between 2007 and 2010, with the winner of the award receiving featured billing at two music festivals, Blissfields and The Great Escape, and the opportunity to tour with a high-profile act. Winners of the award included The Runners, Ben Howard, Klaus Says Buy The Record, and The Laurel Collective, while judges ranged from musicians such as Guy Garvey, music journalists and brand representatives from Red Stripe. As a result, brand sales grew significantly with Red Stripe becoming available throughout Camden, Manchester, Glasgow, Brighton and in key music venues across the UK. During this period, Red Stripe continued to be the unofficial beer of the Notting Hill Carnival which it has been since 1976.\n\nWriter and music festival PR Alex Lee Thomson also presented a series of web based interviews for the brand during their sponsorship periods of Camden Crawl and The Great Escape festivals in the UK, while editing their music-based website.\n\nRed Stripe sponsors sports talk television program \"Pardon the Interruption\" during the summer months, alternating with Guinness. Also recently Red Stripe began sponsoring the International Festival of Thumb Wrestling held annually in Mason City, Iowa. Red Stripe also sponsored Ignite Urban competition along with SUM Entertainment.\n\nRed Stripe Light has also been announced as the official beer category Major Sponsor for the 2010 \"Zwack\" Air Hockey World Championships taking place in July 2010 in Houston, Texas.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "672120", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=672120", "title": "Pilsner Urquell", "text": "Pilsner Urquell\n\nPilsner Urquell (, ), is a Czech lager brewed by the Pilsner Urquell Brewery in Plzeň (Pilsen), Czech Republic. Pilsner Urquell is the world’s first blond or pale lager, and its popularity meant it was much copied, and many of these copies are named \"pils\", \"pilsner\" or \"pilsener\". It is hopped with Saaz hops (Czech: \"Žatec\"), named after a town in West Bohemia, a noble hop variety which is a key element in its flavour profile, as is the use of soft water and fire-brewing. It is available in 330 ml, 355 ml and 500 ml aluminium cans and green or brown bottles.\n\nAlmost all draught Pilsner Urquell is packaged in kegs and dispensed under carbon dioxide pressure but small quantities are available unpasteurised, unfiltered and naturally conditioned in cask in the Czech Republic and in very limited amounts in Germany, the United Kingdom, the United States, Sweden, Hungary and Austria. Pilsner Urquell is exported in bottles and cans to North America, Australia and other regions.\n\nPilsner Urquell was the first pale lager, and the pilsner name is often used in copies: pilsner. It is characterised by its golden colour and clarity, and was immensely successful: nine out of ten beers produced and consumed in the world are pale lagers based on Pilsner Urquell. The name, which can be roughly translated into English as \"the original source at Pilsen\", was adopted as a trademark in 1898.\nBefore 1840, the standard beer in Bohemia was warm fermented and characterized by a dark colour, turbidity, and inconsistent quality. Plzeň burghers had not found this satisfying and the Plzeň city council ordered 36 casks to be dumped. They invested in a new, state-of-the art brewery, the \"Bürgerbrauerei\" (Town brewery, \"Měšťanský pivovar\" in Czech), and commissioned Josef Groll, a Bavarian brewer, to develop a better beer. On 5 October 1842, Groll had an entirely new mash ready and on 11 November 1842, the new beer was first served at the feast of Saint Martin markets.\n\nBürgerbrauerei registered \"Pilsner Bier B B\" brand in 1859. In 1898, they also registered \"Original Pilsner Bier 1842\", \"Plzeňský pramen\", \"Prapramen\", \"Měšťanské Plzeňské\", \"Plzeňský pravý zdroj\" and finally \"Pilsner Urquell\" and \"Plzeňský Prazdroj\" which are in use today.\n\nPilsner Urquell is today brewed in two breweries; in the Pilsen brewery and in Kaluga, Russia. It was brewed between 2002 and 2011 in Tychy in Poland.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "672961", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=672961", "title": "Monopolowa", "text": "Monopolowa\n\nMonopolowa, originally a Polish brand, is a vodka made in Austria by Gessler. It is distilled from potatoes and is marketed under the brand name of J. A. Baczewski.\n\n\"Monopolowa\" means \"monopoly\", in this case referring to a privilege given to the Polish nobility class of the \"szlachta\", giving them exclusive rights to produce and sell vodka in their territories. \n\nMonopolowa was produced by J. A. Baczewski until World War II. After the war, Gessler, an Austrian company, bought the licence and the rights to production. In 1990, the Starogard Gdański based branch of Polmos, a privatized offshoot of the former state-owned monopoly, started to produce several of J.A. Baczewski's products under license from Altvater Gessler - J.A. Baczewski International (USA) Inc. However, in the late 1990s, the license was terminated and production in Poland was halted.\n\nMonopolowa has consistently scored top marks in awards and is marketed to consumers looking for a high quality product with a low price. It scored a 94 at the 2003 International Review of Spirits, the highest score, tying with Stolichnaya. In 2008, the independent Beverage Testing Institute gave Monopolowa a rating of 93/100, calling the vodka \"exceptional\".\n\nTaste tests from the Beverage Testing Institute describe the vodka as follows: \"clear, [with] mild aromas of buttercream, candied citrus peel and anise follow through on a round, silky entry to a dryish medium body with notes of banana taffy and minerals. Finishes with long, very smooth fade. A pristine, poised vodka for sipping neat or in martinis.\" Vodka Monopolowa is suited for usage in mixed drinks of all kinds, and is sometimes served with a squeeze of lemon juice to \"further enhance the flavour and texture.\"\n\n\n"}
{"id": "674917", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=674917", "title": "Cinnamon Toast Crunch", "text": "Cinnamon Toast Crunch\n\nCinnamon Toast Crunch (known as Croque-Cannelle in French Canada, Curiously Cinnamon in the UK (previously Cinnamon Grahams), and as a different-tasting but similar-looking variant called Cini Minis in other European and Latin American countries where available), is a brand of breakfast cereal produced by General Mills and Nestlé. The cereal was first produced in 1984. Cinnamon Toast Crunch aims to provide the taste of cinnamon toast in a crunch cereal format. The cereal consists of small squares or rectangles of wheat and rice covered with cinnamon and sugar. Because of its rice content, when immersed in milk, one can hear \"snap\" sounds coming from it, similar to Rice Krispies. In most European countries and North America the product is sold in boxes but in Poland and Russia the cereal is sold in bags. The product was originally marketed outside Europe with the mascot of a jolly baker named Chef Wendell, but was replaced with sentient Cinnamon Toast Crunch squares as mascots, who would often eat each other in commercials.\n\nOriginally the cereal featured plain squares but currently features artificial \"cinnamon swirl\" coloration in each piece. The cereal was originally invented by scientist John Mendesh and by General Mills assistant product manager Elisabeth Trach. Starting in 1985 there were three animated bakers as the mascots, none of which were originally named; the two besides Wendell are sometimes incorrectly credited as Bob and Quello. The other two bakers were considerably more youthful in appearance than Wendell. Quello, who was Wendell's second-in-command, was tall and thin with brown hair, and Bob, the youngest of the group, had black hair and a stocky build. According to an inquiry response from General Mills Customer Service:\n\nOriginally, the three bakers were the mascots. The cereal did not have a slogan, but it featured the three bakers singing the cereal's name with each baker singing one word in its title. Starting in 1995, it was given the slogan: \"The taste you can see.\" In January 2007, Cinnamon Toast Crunch experimented with a new slogan, \"It's That Intense,\" but switched back after poor reception. In 2009 the slogan became \"Crave those crazy squares\".\n\nIn 1997, appealing to adult-oriented programming, a campaign featured the slogan \"The adult thing to do\", mostly centering on their adult things going back to children's stuff, including cereal (which a fictional \"adult\" cereal named \"Health Pellets\" was featured before replacing it with Cinnamon Toast Crunch). This was changed in 2004 to \"Breakfast on a whole other level\", which was replaced with the \"Crave those crazy squares\" in 2009.\n\nCurrent advertisements for this cereal portray adults in some form unable to \"see what makes them so popular,\" the adult guesses something completely off the wall, and usually related to the adult's profession, whereby the children correct them and loudly say \"It's the cinnamon sugar swirls in every bite!\". However, the cereal is also currently advertised directly to adults, as a healthy breakfast choice with a great taste they grew up with. Either way, the portrayal has worked; it is favored in 54% of states in the United States. \n\nThere have been four offshoots of the cereal: \"French Toast Crunch\" in 1995 and again in 2015, \"Peanut Butter Toast Crunch\" in 2004 and 2013, \"Frosted Toast Crunch\" in 2012, and Sugar Cookie Toast Crunch for the 2014 holiday season. French Toast Crunch is shaped like many little French toast slices, reminiscent of the style of Cookie Crisp. It was discontinued in 2006, but made a return in 2015 due to its cult popularity among its fans. Peanut Butter Toast Crunch was a cereal consisting of flakes similar but darker to Cinnamon Toast Crunch. Frosted Toast Crunch resembles Cinnamon Toast Crunch with vanilla coating. This cereal was discontinued by 2006. As another offshoot, Monopoly Cereal was a limited edition product created in April 2003 by General Mills. The cereal was like Cinnamon Toast Crunch but with the addition of marshmallows based on the pieces in the Monopoly game, such as houses and hotels. Sugar Cookie Toast Crunch was like Cinnamon Toast Crunch except with a sugar cookie taste.\n\nIn Germany, Austria, Hungary, and Israel, where a variant of the cereal is known as \"Cini Minis\", a strawberry flavoured variant named Erdbeer Minis/Strawberry Minis exists. In Germany and Austria it replaced a previously existing apple flavoured variant called Äpple Minis. This strawberry flavoured variant was later released in the UK as Curiously Strawberry.\n\nOne serving of Cinnamon Toast Crunch cereal, equal to ¾ cup (177 mL) or 31 g, has 130 calories (544 kJ), or 170 calories (711 kJ) with ½ cup (118 mL) of skim milk. A single serving has 3 g of total fat, no cholesterol, 220 mg of sodium, and 45 mg of potassium. One serving has 25 g of total carbohydrates with 2 g of dietary fiber and 9 g of sugars with 14 g of other carbohydrates. A single serving also contains 1 g of protein.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "676211", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=676211", "title": "Darkcutter", "text": "Darkcutter\n\nA darkcutter or dark cutter is a carcass of beef that has been subjected to undue stress before slaughter, and is dark in color. Sometimes referred to as dark cutting beef, they have a dark color which makes the meat appear less fresh, making them undesirable to consumers. Darkcutters fetch a lower price than otherwise ordinary beef on the market. \n\nStress \"ante mortem\" causes a depletion of glycogen stores in the liver and muscles, so the glucose normally used \"post mortem\" to produce ATP anaerobically, resulting in lactic acid production before the development of \"rigor mortis\", is not available. The muscle pH stays high (above 6.0), resulting in higher water-holding capacity (sticky protein) and more translucent muscle, which looks darker because light travels deeper into the muscle before being refracted.\n\n"}
{"id": "676595", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=676595", "title": "Makki di roti", "text": "Makki di roti\n\nMakki di roti () (Urdu: مکئی کی روٹی ) is a flat, unleavened Punjabi bread made from corn meal, primarily eaten in Punjab region in the northern part of the Indian subcontinent. Like most rotis in the Indian subcontinent, it is baked on a \"tava\". \n\nLiterally, \"makki di roti\" means \"\"bread\" of maize\" in the Punjabi language. Makki di roti is yellow in color when ready, and has much less adhesive strength — which makes it difficult to handle. \n\nMakki di roti is generally made during winter in Punjab and is often accompanied with saag (especially sarson da saag i.e. cooked mustard green leaves), \"makkhan\" (butter) and buttermilk. Similarly, in Himachal and Punjab, it is eaten with saag (from shaak for vegetable in Sanskrit) and also Maah (Urad) daal.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "678353", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=678353", "title": "Wagashi", "text": "Wagashi\n\nIn Japan, the word for sweets, , originally referred to fruits and nuts. With the increasing sugar trade between China and Japan, sugar became a common household ingredient by the end of the Muromachi period. Influenced by the introduction of tea, China's confectionery, and \"dim sum\", the creation of wagashi took off during the Edo period in Japan.\n\n\"Wagashi\" are classified according to the production method and moisture content. Moisture content is very important, since it affects shelf life.\nWagashi typically takes a lot of work. It is usually named after poetry, historical events, or natural scenery.\n\nWagashi is well known for its delicateness and variety in appearance. This can reflect the delicacy culture of Japan.\n\nWagashi can be used as a great gift during festivals, and can also be daily treat for visiting guests. Different places have wagashi that are unique in flavor as their local specialty. Japanese people tend to take back home wagashi after business trips or personal trips.\n\nJapanese people believe that the artistic characteristic of wagashi represents both a sense of the season when wagashi is made and a humble culture of Japan.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "679208", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=679208", "title": "Flotsam, jetsam, lagan, and derelict", "text": "Flotsam, jetsam, lagan, and derelict\n\nIn maritime law, \"flotsam\", \"jetsam\", \"lagan\", and \"derelict\" are specific kinds of shipwreck. The words have specific nautical meanings, with legal consequences in the law of admiralty and marine salvage. A shipwreck is defined as the remains of a ship that has been wrecked—a destroyed ship at sea, whether it be sunken or floating on the surface of the water.\n\nA wreck is categorized as property belonging to no apparent owner, that either sinks to the seabed, or floats on the surface of the water, whether it be intentionally cast overboard, or as the result of an accident. The term encompasses the hull of the vessel and its fixtures, as well as any other form of object on board, such as cargo and stores, and personal effects of the crew and passengers. This also encompasses the narrower definition of salvage, that is, property that has been recovered from a wreckage, or the recovery of the ship itself.\nThere are a number of factors that contribute to the formation of a shipwreck, that can be divided into physical and cultural processes. A site can be affected by physical processes, that is, naturally occurring processes, such as the corrosion caused by salinity and ocean currents, or the growth of native and foreign marine organisms. It can also be affected by cultural processes, that is, by human interactions, such as adding or removing materials from the site of the wreck. Any archaeological activity, such as excavation, may also be considered invasive and tampering.\n\nIn terms of maritime law, different meanings are attributed to the terms, based on what the jurisdiction is, as well as the context. For example, a distinction is made between goods that wash ashore, from those that are for some reason not salvageable and/or lost at sea.\n\nOwnership of a wreck is a highly controversial issue, as there are no clear lines within which it is defined. It may be acquired through various means that range from succession to confiscation. There is also a distinction to be made between the ownership of the hull itself and the cargo it contains, as the hull may be abandoned intentionally, whereas the cargo may be out of necessity (in the case of an emergency or the need to shed weight from the vessel). In these parameters, abandonment of the ship by its passengers constitutes as a loss of possession, but to abandon the claim on the title itself, intention to relinquish it is required. This affects wrecks by limiting that which is considered \"abandoned\". Generally, a ship is defined as \"abandoned\" if there is no hope of recovery, known legally as \"Sine spe recuperandi\" (which is the Latin phrase for \"no hope of recovery\"), and this fact must be clearly proven by the salvaging party. It must also occur on navigable waters.\nThe term \"salvage\" is used to indicate a salvage operation, as well as the subsequent awarded compensation. It is considered a voluntary service rendered in cases such as danger to the wreck, or the surrounding navigable waters. In terms of compensation, it is seen as being awarded to anyone who voluntarily assisted in the recuperation of the wreck, whether it be saved from upcoming danger, or from loss.\n\nThe Law of Salvage finds its origins in the Roman practice of \"negotiorum gestio\", which dictated that one who preserved or improved upon the property of another, was owed compensation from the owner, even if the service was not requested by the latter. The law did not apply to maritime regulations, but were the basis for following ordinances, such as the Marine Ordinance of Trani, which stated that a \"finder\" was to be rewarded, whether the owner claimed the goods or not. The laws have evolved since \"negotiorum gestio\", and today, in the United States, a salvor who voluntarily brings the goods back into port may legally lay claim to them, or deliver them to a marshal, in return for a reward.\n\nAlso known as \"flotsan\", the term \"flotsam\" refers to a sunken vessel whose goods float to the surface of the sea, or any floating cargo that is cast overboard.\n\nIn terms of maritime law, the definition of flotsam pertains to goods that are floating on the surface of the water as the result of a wreck or an accident. As there is no clear way of defining ownership, one who discovers flotsam is allowed to claim it, unless someone claims ownership to the items in question. Even when the source is known, as with the up to 270 cargo containers lost by the MSC ZOE in heavy seas in December 2018 off the German island of Borkum, as a practical matter the lost goods found on the Dutch coast was considered to be flotsam.\n\nThe term \"jetsam\" designates any cargo that is intentionally discarded from a ship or wreckage. Legally jetsam also floats, although floating is not part of the etymological meaning. Generally, \"jettisoning\" connotes the action of throwing goods overboard to lighten the load of the ship if it is in danger of being sunk.\n\nPer maritime law, one who discovers these artifacts is required to return them to their rightful owner only in the case that the latter makes a legally abiding claim.\n\nAlthough, according to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration \"flotsam may be claimed by the original owner, whereas jetsam may be claimed as property of whoever discovers it\".\n\nAlso called \"ligan\", the term refers to goods that are cast overboard and are heavy enough to sink to the ocean floor, but are tied or otherwise linked to a floating marker, such as a buoy or cork, so that they can be found again by whoever marked the item. Lagan can also refer to large objects that are trapped within the sinking vessel.\n\nAccording to maritime law, a buoy, or otherwise floating object, constitutes as sufficient grounds in laying claim to an artifact. In other words, when faced with a lagan, one is required to return the artifact to its rightful owner.\n\n\"Derelict\" can refer to goods that have sunk to the ocean floor, relinquished willingly or forcefully by its owner, and thus abandoned, but which no one has any hope of reclaiming.\n\nIn terms of maritime law, derelict is considered property abandoned on navigable waters which has no hope of being recovered, or \"sine spe recuperandi\", and no expectation of it being returned to its owner, or \"sine animo revertendi\".\n\n"}
{"id": "679346", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=679346", "title": "Lucozade", "text": "Lucozade\n\nLucozade is a soft drink manufactured by the Japanese company Suntory and marketed as a range of sports and energy drinks. Created as \"Glucozade\" in the UK in 1927 by a Newcastle pharmacist, William Walker Hunter (trading as W. Owen & Son), it was acquired by the British pharmaceutical company Beecham's in 1938 and sold as an energy drink for the sick as Lucozade. The company's advertising slogan was \"Lucozade aids recovery\".\n\nA glucose–water solution, the product was sold until 1983 as a carbonated, slightly orange-flavoured drink in a glass bottle wrapped in yellow cellophane. Pharmacists sold it, children were given it when ill, and hospital visitors would regularly arrive with a bottle. It was rebranded as a \"pick me up\" in 1978 and as a sports drink in 1983 to associate it with health rather than sickness. The company switched to a plastic bottle and introduced a range of flavours. As of 2016, a 500 ml bottle contained 62 g (15.5 cubes) of sugar, more than Coca-Cola. In 2017, to avoid sugar tax, the drink was reformulated to contain 4.5 g of sugar per 100 ml of liquid and the artificial sweeteners aspartame and acesulfame K.\n\nIn 1989 the Beecham Group merged to form SmithKline Beecham, which in 2000 merged to form GlaxoSmithKline. In September 2013 GlaxoSmithKline sold Lucozade and another soft drink, Ribena, to the Japanese conglomerate Suntory for £1.35 billion.\n\n\"Glucozade\" was invented by William Walker Hunter in 1927 in Newcastle; Hunter had taken over the business of pharmacist William Owen. Hunter sold the product to Beecham Group in 1938 and it was eventually renamed to Lucozade.\n\nIn 1953, a factory for the production of Lucozade products was opened in Brentford, which, until 2004, had an iconic sign seen on the side of the M4 motorway (now in Gunnersbury Park Museum). \n\nLucozade originally was available in only one variety, which was effervescent with a distinctive sweet citric flavour. It was sold in a glass bottle with a yellow cellophane wrap until 1983, when Lucozade was rebranded as an energy drink to shift the brand's associations away from illness. The slogan \"Lucozade aids recovery\" was replaced by \"Lucozade replaces lost energy\". The glass bottle was replaced by a plastic (polyethylene terephthalate, PET) one. After the rebranding, between 1984 and 1989 UK sales tripled to almost £75 million.\n\nIn 1989 the Beecham Group and SmithKline Beckman merged to form SmithKline Beecham, and in 2000 SmithKline Beecham and GlaxoWellcome merged to form GlaxoSmithKline (GSK). In 2013 GSK put Ribena and Lucozade up for sale. Suntory, a Japanese holding company, bought the brands in September for £1.35 billion. At the time of the sale, the product was manufactured in England at the Royal Forest Factory in Coleford, Gloucestershire, in the Forest of Dean.\n\nThe following flavours are currently available in the UK:\n\nThe following flavours are currently sold as Zero Energy products:\n\nThe following flavours were previously sold in the UK:\n\nThe following flavours are available in Australia:\n\nA stated purpose of sports drinks, which provide many calories of energy from sugars, is to improve performance and endurance. In an analysis by Matthew Thompson and colleagues from the Oxford Centre for Evidence Based Medicine, of 431 marketing claims of performance enhancement, most cited no evidence. 174 sources were cited for Lucozade; of them, Thompson found only three studies of high quality with a low risk of bias. The rigorous studies that did show improved endurance were \"of limited relevance to most people because the tests were on elite athletes\". Thompson said that for the vast majority of people drinking such products \"could completely counteract exercising more, playing football more, going to the gym more\".\n\nThe drinks are marketed as soft drinks; a soft drinks industry spokesman said in response \"By helping people participating in sport to perform better and to recover more quickly, sports drinks can encourage people to exercise more\".\n\nIn May 2016, Liverpool City Council started a campaign against so-called \"sugary drinks\". The \"name and shame\" campaign, entitled “Is your child’s sweet tooth harming their health?”, claimed that Lucozade was the worst offender, containing 62 grams of sugar in a 500 ml bottle, followed by Coca-Cola with 54 grams. Posters for the campaign \"were displayed in doctors' surgeries and hospitals.\"\n\nIn its original high sugar content formulation Lucozade was recommended by UK diabetes charities as an immediate treatment for hypoglycemia in individuals who take insulin. Since its change to use of artificial sweeteners guidelines have been changed to state that Lucozade should not be used to treat diabetic hypos.<ref>\n"}
{"id": "679936", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=679936", "title": "Rillettes", "text": "Rillettes\n\nRillettes (; ) are a preparation of meat similar to pâté. Commonly made from pork, the meat is cubed or chopped, salted heavily and cooked slowly in fat, shredded, and then cooled with enough of the fat to form a paste. They are normally used as spread on bread or toast and served at room temperature.\n\nRillettes are also made with other meats, goose, duck, chicken, game birds, rabbit and sometimes with fish such as anchovies, tuna or salmon.\n\nSarthe (Le Mans), Tours, and Anjou, all in central France, are notable sources of rillettes.\n\nThe term \"rillette\" perhaps refers to the final product and its appearance when spread on sliced bread. Rillettes were traditionally made with fatty pork belly or pork shoulder. The meat was cubed, salted and cured, cooked slowly over low heat until very tender, then raked into small shreds and blended with the warm cooking fat to form a rustic paste. Rillettes could be stored in crocks for several months. In Anjou, rillaud was a speciality, plated in the shape of a pyramid and topped with the pig's tail; the rillettes were proudly displayed to the guest of honor. In time the rillette cooking style was applied to game birds, wild rabbit, and fish. Eventually several preparations for seafood rillettes were developed including an anchovy, tuna, and salmon version. Though the fish is not actually cooked in the fat, it is blended with fat to form the characteristic paste-spread. The soft, smooth texture is a deciding factor in determining a good rillette dish.\n\nLike cassoulet or fondue, this French dish has its many regional definitions. In general most rillettes are served at room temperature, as a spread with toast points, much like a pâté. Pork rillettes from the northwestern regions of Tours and Anjou are famous for the rich texture and bronze color achieved during the cooking process. Rabelais called rillettes \"the brown jam from the pig\" (\"brune confiture de cochon\"). Rillettes from the adjacent \"département\" of Sarthe are distinguished by a more rustic texture, complete with larger pieces of pork and less color.\n\nIn Quebec, cretons are similar to rillettes.\n\nThe French word \"rillettes\" is first evidenced in 1845. It derives from the Old French \"rille\", meaning a slice of pork, which is first attested in 1480. This is a dialect variation of the Old French \"reille\", meaning a lath or strip of wood, from the Latin \"regula\".\n\nThe word \"rillettes\" is thus cognate or linked with the English words \"rail\", referring to railways, and \"ruler\", meaning a straight strip of wood for measuring.\n\n"}
{"id": "681610", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=681610", "title": "Mustamakkara", "text": "Mustamakkara\n\nMustamakkara () is a type of Finnish blood sausage traditionally eaten with lingonberry jam. It is nowadays available in many stores across Finland, but is held in the position of local delicacy and speciality of Tampere. Mustamakkara is at its best when bought and eaten fresh at market stalls, to which it is delivered hot in styrofoam boxes from the factories directly after baking. A typical practice of reheating the sausage is to just fry it in a pan.\n\nMustamakkara is known to have been eaten as early as in the 17th century and was generally cooked over a small fire, in a hot cauldron or in an oven. Mustamakkara is made by mixing pork, pig blood, crushed rye and flour, after which it is stuffed into the intestines of an animal like most sausages. The two major producers of this food are Tapola and Savupojat.\n\nWhen buying mustamakkara in the Tampere region it is customary to specify the amount of money to spend instead of weight, length or number of pieces. Often people also choose by simply pointing at the preferred piece. The shape and moisture of mustamakkara varies and by this means the buyer can get the piece best suiting his or her taste. Also common is to indicate purchase of a complete sausage by requesting an \"out-and-return\" \"menopaluu\" which refers to its U-shape. \n"}
{"id": "681654", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=681654", "title": "Snaps", "text": "Snaps\n\nSnaps (, ) is a Danish and Swedish word for a small shot of a strong alcoholic beverage taken during the course of a meal. A ritual that is associated with drinking snaps is a tradition in Scandinavia, especially in Denmark and Sweden, where it is very common to drink snaps at holidays such as Midsummer, Christmas and Easter. This ritual has been described by one author as follows:\n\nA group of people are clustered around a table for a typical lunch that will include several courses and a clear, fiery drink. The host pours the ice-cold liquid into frosty, conical glasses with long stems. He raises his glass, at which point the diners turn to one another and make eye contact, making certain not to leave anyone out. “\"Skål!\"” calls out the host, and everyone takes a sip. Again there is eye contact, and then the glasses are set on the table, not to be lifted again until the host raises his. The liquid is aquavit. The ritual is virtually the same throughout Scandinavia. \n\nIn Denmark, a snaps will always be akvavit, although there are many varieties of it. In Sweden, \"snaps\" is a more general term; it is usually akvavit, although it may also be vodka, bitters/bitter liqueurs or some other kind of \"brännvin\"/\"brændevin\". Spirits such as whisky or brandy are seldom drunk as snaps.\n\nThe word “snaps” also has the same meaning as German \"Schnaps\" (), in the sense of “any strong alcoholic drink.”\n\nAn entrée consisting of pickled herring and potatoes is typically served with snaps, as is the Swedish \"surströmming\".\n\nSwedes, Danes and Swedish-speaking Finns have a tradition of singing songs (called \"snapsvisor\") before drinking snaps. These \"snapsvisor \" are typically odes to the joys of drinking snaps. They may praise the flavour of snaps or express a craving for it.\n\nSnaps and \"snapsvisor\" are essential elements of crayfish parties, which are notoriously tipsy affairs. Dozens of songs may be sung during such a party, and every song requires a round of snaps. However, the glass need not be emptied every time.\n\nDistilling snaps at home is illegal in Scandinavian countries, unless approved by tax authorities.\n\nIllegal home distilling, however, is a widespread tradition, especially in many rural communities of Sweden, Finland and Norway.\n\nA tradition of “home flavouring” snaps exists in Scandinavia. This tradition is strongest in the southern areas, particularly Denmark. A snaps enthusiast will typically buy a commercially made, neutral-tasting snaps, and then add flavour to it by adding herbs found in nature or grown in a garden. For instance, in northern Denmark, various spices are added to snaps to produce a version called \"bjesk\", which roughly translated means “bitter”. In Hirtshals, the Hirtshals Museum tells the story of the \"bjesk\".\n\nPopular flavours for home flavouring include Blackthorn, Bog-myrtle, Dill, Persian Walnut, St. John’s Wort, Woodruff, and Wormwood. The herbs are commonly used singly, but some enthusiasts experiment with mixing them to achieve “the perfect flavour.”\n\n\n"}
{"id": "681752", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=681752", "title": "Blanquette de veau", "text": "Blanquette de veau\n\nBlanquette de veau () is a French veal ragout in which neither the veal nor the butter is browned in the cooking process. To refrain from browning meat and fat in this way, is to cook them \"en blanquette\".\n\nFrom Larousse Gastronomique\n\"BLANQUETTE: the French term for a ragout of white meat (veal, lamb or poultry) cooked in a white stock or water with aromatic flavorings. Theoretically, the sauce is obtained by making a roux and adding cream and egg yolks. However, the roux is more often than not omitted. Blanquette had a very important place in historical cuisine and became a classic of bourgeois cookery. Blanquettes are also made with fish (monkfish) and vegetables (chard and celery.)\"\n\nTo prepare \"blanquette de veau\", one stews pieces of veal (such as shoulder or breast) and mirepoix, Strain, reserving meat, then bolster the broth with roux. Boil to thicken, then return meat to stew. International Culinary Center recipe includes adding pearl onions and quartered mushrooms to the mix. Finish with a liaison of heavy cream and yolk, 1:1. Do not further cook once egg is added, to avoid curdling.\n\nAgain, from Larousse, \"Blanquette is usually served with rice a la creole but may also be served with celeriac (celery root), halved celery hearts, carrots, braised parsnips or leeks, cucumber (cut into chunks and braised three minutes in boiling salted water, braised lettuce or lettuce hearts.\n\nEven modern chefs follow tradition in this classic dish. From The Country Cooking of France: Mushrooms, carrots and rice are the most common accompaniments to this dish, although the carrots should not be there. Pasta or potatoes can occasionally be served instead of rice.\n\nHowever, Georges Auguste Escoffier's Le Guide culinaire written in 1903 lists both the \"Blanquette de Veau a l'Ancienne\" (old fashioned Blanquette Veal breast) as being served with noodles instead of rice. He also lists a second recipe, Blanquette of Veal Breast with Celery Knobs and endives, which is served on parboiled noodles as well.\n\nBecause this is a classic \"white stew\" there is a prejudice to serving it with any items that would add color (i.e. carrots or peas).\n\n\n•\"The Food Lover's Companion\" by Sharon Tyler Herbst, Barron's Cooking Guide, Copyright 1995, \nLibrary of Congress catalog number 95-15208\n"}
{"id": "682549", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=682549", "title": "Baba ghanoush", "text": "Baba ghanoush\n\nBaba ghanoush ( \"bābā ghannūj\", also appears as \"baba ganoush\" or \"baba ghanouj\") is a Levantine appetizer of mashed cooked eggplant mixed with tahini (made from sesame seeds), olive oil, and various seasonings. \n\nThe traditional preparation method is for the eggplant to be baked or broiled over an open flame before peeling, so that the pulp is soft and has a smoky taste. It is a typical \"meze\" (starter), often eaten as a dip with pita bread, and is sometimes added to other dishes.\n\nThe \"bābā\" is an Arabic word that means \"father\" and is also a term of endearment, while \"ghannūj\" could be a personal name. The word combination is also interpreted as \"father of coquetry\" or \"indulged/pampered daddy\" or \"\"spoiled old daddy\"\". It is not certain whether the word \"bābā\" refers to the eggplant or to an actual person indulged by this treat. \n\nThe Perisan Gulf versions vary slightly from that of its home of origin by spicing it with coriander and cumin.\n\nIn Israel, it is also known as \"salat ḥatzilim\", although a variation with that name made with mayonnaise instead of tahini is also widely available.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "682929", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=682929", "title": "Varna (Hinduism)", "text": "Varna (Hinduism)\n\nVarna () means type, order, colour or class. The term refers to social classes in Brahminical books like the \"Manusmriti\". These and other Hindu literature classified the society in principle into four varnas:\n\nCommunities which belong to one of the four varnas or classes are called \"savarna\". In the present-day context, they include all the forward castes. The Dalits and scheduled tribes who do not belong to any varna, are called \"avarna\".\n\nThis quadruple division is a form of social stratification not to be confused with the much more nuanced \"Jāti\" or the European term \"caste\".\n\nThe varna system is discussed in Hindu texts, and understood as idealised human callings. The concept is generally traced to the \"Purusha Sukta\" verse of the Rig Veda.\n\nThe commentary on the Varna system in the \"Manusmriti\" is oft-cited. Counter to these textual classifications, many Hindu texts and doctrines question and disagree with the Varna system of social classification.\n\nVarna (' (वर्ण)) is a Sanskrit term. It is derived from the root ', meaning \"to cover, to envelop, count, classify, consider, describe or choose\" (compare \"\").\n\nThe word appears in the \"Rigveda\", where it means \"colour, outward appearance, exterior, form, figure or shape\". The word means \"color, tint, dye or pigment\" in the \"Mahabharata\". Varna contextually means \"colour, race, tribe, species, kind, sort, nature, character, quality, property\" of an object or people in some Vedic and medieval texts. Varna refers to four social classes in the \"Manusmriti\".\n\nThe earliest application to the formal division into four social classes (without using the term \"varna\") appears in the late Rigvedic \"Purusha Sukta\" (RV 10.90.11–12), which has the Brahman, Rajanya (instead of Kshatriya), Vaishya and Shudra classes forming the mouth, arms, thighs and feet at the sacrifice of the primordial Purusha, respectively:\n\nThis Purusha Sukta varna verse is now generally considered to have been inserted at a later date into the Vedic text, possibly as a charter myth. Stephanie Jamison and Joel Brereton, a professor of Sanskrit and Religious studies, state, \"there is no evidence in the Rigveda for an elaborate, much-subdivided and overarching caste system\", and \"the varna system seems to be embryonic in the Rigveda and, both then and later, a social ideal rather than a social reality\".\n\nRam Sharan Sharma states that \"the Rig Vedic society was neither organized on the basis of social division of labour nor on that of differences in wealth ... [it] was primarily organised on the basis of kin, tribe and lineage.\"\n\nIn the post-Vedic period, the varna division is described in the \"Dharmashastra\" literature, the \"Mahabharata\" and in the \"Puranas\".\n\nVarna system is extensively discussed in Dharma-sastras. The Varna system in Dharma-sastras divides society into four varnas (Brahmins, Kshatriyas, Vaishya and Shudras). Those who fall out of this system because of their grievous sins are ostracised as outcastes (untouchables) and considered outside the varna system. Barbarians and those who are unrighteous or unethical are also considered outcastes.\n\nRecent scholarship suggests that the discussion of varna as well as untouchable outcastes in these texts does not resemble the modern era caste system in India. Patrick Olivelle, a professor of Sanskrit and Indian Religions and credited with modern translations of Vedic literature, Dharma-sutras and Dharma-sastras, states that ancient and medieval Indian texts do not support the ritual pollution, purity-impurity as the basis for varna system. According to Olivelle, purity-impurity is discussed in the Dharma-sastra texts, but only in the context of the individual's moral, ritual and biological pollution (eating certain kinds of food such as meat, urination and defecation). In his review of Dharma-sastras, Olivelle writes, \"we see no instance when a term of pure/impure is used with reference to a group of individuals or a varna or caste\". The only mention of impurity in the Shastra texts from the 1st millennium is about people who commit grievous sins and thereby fall out of their varna. These, writes Olivelle, are called \"fallen people\" and impure, declaring that they be ostracised. Olivelle adds that the overwhelming focus in matters relating to purity/impurity in the Dharma-sastra texts concerns \"individuals irrespective of their varna affiliation\" and all four varnas could attain purity or impurity by the content of their character, ethical intent, actions, innocence or ignorance, stipulations, and ritualistic behaviours.\n\nOlivelle states: \n\nThe first three varnas are described in the \"Dharmasastras\" as \"twice born\" and they are allowed to study the \"Vedas\". Such a restriction of who can study Vedas is not found in the Vedic era literature.\n\n\"Manusmriti\" assigns cattle rearing as Vaishya occupation but historical evidence shows that Brahmins, Kshatriyas and Shudras also owned and reared cattle and that cattle-wealth was mainstay of their households. Ramnarayan Rawat, a professor of History and specialising in social exclusion in the Indian subcontinent, states that 19th century British records show that Chamars, listed as untouchables, also owned land and cattle and were active agriculturalists. The emperors of Kosala and the prince of Kasi are other examples.\n\nTim Ingold, an anthropologist, writes that the \"Manusmriti\" is a highly schematic commentary on the varna system, but it too provides \"models rather than descriptions\". Susan Bayly states that \"Manusmriti\" and other scriptures helped elevate Brahmin in the social hierarchy and these were a factor in the making of the varna system, but the ancient texts did not in some way \"create the phenomenon of caste\" in India.\n\nThe \"Mahabharata\", estimated to have been completed by about the 4th century CE, discusses the Varna system in section 12.181.\n\nThe Epic offers two models on Varna. The first model describes Varna as colour-coded system, through a sage named Bhrigu, \"Brahmins Varna was white, Kshtriyas was red, Vaishyas was yellow, and the Shudras' black\". This description is questioned by another prominent sage Bharadvaja who says that colours are seen among all the Varnas, that desire, anger, fear, greed, grief, anxiety, hunger and toil prevails over all human beings, that bile and blood flow from all human bodies, so what distinguishes the Varnas, he asks? The \"Mahabharata\" then declares, according to Alf Hiltebeitel, a professor of religion, \"There is no distinction of Varnas. This whole universe is Brahman. It was created formerly by Brahma, came to be classified by acts.\"\n\nThe \"Mahabharata\" thereafter recites a behavioural model for Varna, that those who were inclined to anger, pleasures and boldness attained the Kshatriya Varna; those who were inclined to cattle rearing and living off the plough attained the Vaishyas; those who were fond of violence, covetousness and impurity attained the Shudras. The Brahmin class is modelled in the epic, as the archetype default state of man dedicated to truth, austerity and pure conduct. Indeed, it goes on to assert that all men are children of Brahmins, which does not make sense, unless understood this way.In the \"Mahabharata\" and pre-medieval era Hindu texts, according to Hiltebeitel, \"it is important to recognize, in theory, Varna is nongenealogical. The four Varnas are not lineages, but categories.\"\n\nThe \"Bhagavad Gita\" describe the professions, duties and qualities of members of different varnas.\n\nAncient Buddhist texts mention Varna system in South Asia, but the details suggest that it was a non-rigid, flexible and with characteristics devoid of features of a social stratification system. \n\n\"Digha Nikaya\" provides a discussion between Gotama Buddha and a Hindu Brahmin named Sonadanda who was very learned in the Vedas.\nGotama Buddha asks, \"By how many qualities do Brahmins recognize another Brahmin? How would one declare truthfully and without falling into falsehood, \"I am a Brahmin?\"\nSonadanda initially lists five qualities as, \"he is of pure descent on both the mother's and the father's side, he is well versed in mantras, he is of fair color handsome and pleasing, he is virtuous learned and wise, and he is the first or second to hold the sacrificial ladle\". \nBuddha then asks the Brahmin, \"If we omit one of these qualities you just listed, could not one be still a true Brahmin?\" \nSonadanda, one by one, eliminates fair colour and looks, then eliminates Varna in which one was born, and then eliminates the ability to recite mantra and do sacrifices as a requirement of being a Brahmin.\nSonadanda asserts that just two qualities are necessary to truthfully and without falling into falsehoold identify a Brahmin; these two qualities are \"being virtuous and being learned and wise\". Sonadanda adds that it is impossible to reduce the requirement for being a Brahmin any further, because \"for wisdom is purified by morality, and morality is purified by wisdom; where one is, the other is, the moral man has wisdom and the wise man has morality, and the combination of morality and wisdom is called the highest thing in the world\". Brian Black and Dean Patton state Sonadanda admits after this, \"we [Brahmins] only know this much Gotama; it would be well if Reverend Gotama would explain meaning of the two [morality, wisdom]\".\n\nPeter Masefield, a Buddhism scholar and ancient Pali texts translator, states that during the Nikāya texts period of Buddhism (3rd century BC to 5th century AD), \"Varna\" as a class system is attested, but the described \"Varna\" was not a caste system. The Pali texts enumerate the four Varnas \"Brahmin\", \"Kshatriya\",\"Vessa\" (Vaishya) and \"Sudda\" (Shudra). Masefield notes that people in any \"Varna\" could in principle perform any profession. The early Buddhist texts, for instance, identify some Brahmins to be farmers and in other professions. The text state that anyone, of any birth, could perform the priestly function, and that the Brahmin took food from anyone, suggesting that strictures of commensality were as yet unknown. The Nikaya texts also imply that endogamy was not mandated in ancient India. Masefield concludes, \"if any form of caste system was known during the Nikaya period - and it is doubtful that it was - this was in all probability restricted to certain non-Aryan groups\".\n\nĀdi purāṇa, an 8th-century text of Jainism by Jinasena, is the earliest mention of Varna and Jati in Jainism literature. Jinasena does not trace the origin of Varna system to Rigveda or to Purusha Sukta, instead traces varna to the Bharata legend. According to this legend, Bharata performed an \"ahimsa-test\" (test of non-violence), and those members of his community who refused to harm or hurt any living being were called as the priestly varna in ancient India, and Bharata called them \"dvija\", twice born. Jinasena states that those who are committed to ahimsa are \"deva-Brāhmaṇas\", divine Brahmins.\n\nThe text Adi purana also discusses the relationship between varna and jati. According to Padmanabh Jaini, a professor of Indic studies, Jainism and Buddhism, the Adi purana text states \"there is only one jati called \"manusyajati\" or the human caste, but divisions arise account of their different professions\". The varna of Kshatriya arose when Rishabh procured weapons to serve the society and assumed the powers of a king, while Vaishya and Shudra varna arose from different means of livelihood in which they specialised.\n\nSikhism is a late 15th-century religion that originated in the Punjab region of the Indian subcontinent. Sikh texts mention \"Varna\" as \"Varan\", and \"Jati\" as \"Zat\" or \"Zat-biradari\". Eleanor Nesbitt, a professor of Religion and specialising in Christian, Hindu and Sikh studies, states that the \"Varan\" is described as a class system in 18th- to 20th-century Sikh literature, while \"Zat\" reflected the endogamous occupational groups (caste).\n\nThe Sikh texts authored by the Sikh Gurus and by non-Sikh Bhagats such as the Namdev, Ravidas and Kabir, states Nesbitt, declared the irrelevance of \"varan\" or \"zat\" of one's birth to one's spiritual destiny. They taught that \"all of humanity had a single refuge\" and that the divine teaching is for everyone. Sikhism teaches a society without any \"varan\". In practice, states Harjot Oberoi, secondary Sikh texts such as the \"Khalsa Dharam Sastar\" in 1914 argued that the entry of certain Sikh castes into major Sikh shrines should be barred. Similarly, in practice and its texts, the Gurus of Sikhism did not condemn or break with the convention of marrying (and marrying their children) within the \"jati\", and all the Sikh Gurus were Khatri, had Khatri wives and practiced arranged marriages within their \"zat\". According to Dhavan, the Rahit-namas and other prescriptive Sikh texts from mid-18th century onwards accommodate and affirm the \"natal and marriage traditions of different caste groups within the Sikh community\".\n\nRavidassi Sikhs and Ramgarhia Sikhs follow their own textual and festive traditions, gather in their own places of worship. These are varan-based (caste-based) religious congregations that emerged from Sikhism, states Nesbitt. The Ravidassia group, for example, emphasizes the teachings of Bhagat Ravidas – a poet-saint born in a family whose traditional untouchable occupation related to dead animals and leather. They consider the teachings of living Gurus and the texts of Ravidass Dera as sacred and spiritually as important as the historic Sikh Gurus. This is rejected by Khalsa Sikhs. The disagreements have led the Ravidassia Sikhs to launch the Ravidassia religion movement which, amongst other things seeks to replace the \"Guru Granth Sahib\" in their Gurdwaras with the texts of Ravidas.\n\nThe terms \"varna\" (theoretical classification based on occupation) and \"jāti\" (caste) are two distinct concepts. Jāti (community) refers to the thousands of endogamous groups prevalent across the subcontinent. A jati may be divided into exogamous groups based on the same gotras. The classical authors scarcely speak of anything other than the varnas; even Indologists sometimes confuse the two.\n\n"}
{"id": "683726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=683726", "title": "Dandelin spheres", "text": "Dandelin spheres\n\nIn geometry, the Dandelin spheres are one or two spheres that are tangent both to a plane and to a cone that intersects the plane. The intersection of the cone and the plane is a conic section, and the point at which either sphere touches the plane is a focus of the conic section, so the Dandelin spheres are also sometimes called focal spheres.\n\nThe Dandelin spheres were discovered in 1822. They are named in honor of the Belgian mathematician Germinal Pierre Dandelin, though Adolphe Quetelet is sometimes given partial credit as well. The Dandelin spheres can be used to prove at least two important theorems. Both of those theorems were known for centuries before Dandelin, but he made it easier to prove them.\n\nThe first theorem is that a closed conic section (i.e. an ellipse) is the locus of points such that the sum of the distances to two fixed points (the foci) is constant. This was known to Ancient Greek mathematicians such as Apollonius of Perga, but the Dandelin spheres facilitate the proof.\n\nThe second theorem is that for any conic section, the distance from a fixed point (the focus) is proportional to the distance from a fixed line (the directrix), the constant of proportionality being called the eccentricity. Again, this theorem was known to the Ancient Greeks, such as Pappus of Alexandria, but the Dandelin spheres facilitate the proof.\n\nA conic section has one Dandelin sphere for each focus. In particular, an ellipse has two Dandelin spheres, both touching the same nappe of the cone. A hyperbola has two Dandelin spheres, touching opposite nappes of the cone. A parabola has just one Dandelin sphere.\n\nConsider the illustration, depicting a plane intersecting a cone to form a curve (the interior of the curve is colored light blue). The two Dandelin spheres are shown, one (\"G\"1) above the curve, and one (\"G\"2) below. The intersection of each sphere with the cone is a circle (colored white).\n\n\nThis proves a result that had been proved in a different manner by Apollonius of Perga.\n\nIf (as is often done) one takes the definition of the ellipse to be the locus of points \"P\" such that \"d\"(\"F\", \"P\") + \"d\"(\"F\", \"P\") = a constant, then the argument above proves that the intersection of a plane with a cone is indeed an ellipse. That the intersection of the plane with the cone is symmetric about the perpendicular bisector of the line through \"F\" and \"F\" may be counterintuitive, but this argument makes it clear.\n\nAdaptations of this argument work for hyperbolas and parabolas as intersections of a plane with a cone. Another adaptation works for an ellipse realized as the intersection of a plane with a right circular cylinder.\n\nThe directrix of a conic section can be found using Dandelin's construction. Each Dandelin sphere intersects the cone at a circle; let both of these circles define their own planes. The intersections of these two parallel planes with the conic section's plane will be two parallel lines; these lines are the directrices of the conic section. However, a parabola has only one Dandelin sphere, and thus has only one directrix.\n\nUsing the Dandelin spheres, it can be proved that any conic section is the locus of points for which the distance from a point (focus) is proportional to the distance from the directrix. Ancient Greek mathematicians such as Pappus of Alexandria were aware of this property, but the Dandelin spheres facilitate the proof.\n\nNeither Dandelin nor Quetelet used the Dandelin spheres to prove the focus-directrix property. The first to do so may have been Pierce Morton in 1829,\nor perhaps Hugh Hamilton who remarked (in 1758) that a sphere touches the cone at a circle which defines a plane whose intersection with the plane of the conic section is a directrix. The focus-directrix property is essential to proving that astronomical objects move along conic sections around the Sun.\n\n"}
{"id": "684340", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=684340", "title": "Karelian pasty", "text": "Karelian pasty\n\nKarelian pasties, Karelian pies or Karelian pirogs (South Karelian dialect of , singular \"karjalanpiirakka\"; North Karelian dialect of Finnish: \"karjalanpiiraat\", singular \"karjalanpiiras\"; , singular \"kalitta\"; Olonets Karelian: \"šipainiekku\"; \"karelskiy pirog\" or калитка \"kalitka\"; ) are traditional pasties or pirogs from the region of Karelia. Today they are eaten throughout Finland as well as in the neighbouring Estonia and northern Russia.\n\nThe oldest traditional pasties usually had a rye crust, but the North Karelian and Ladoga Karelian variants also contained wheat to improve the baking characteristics. The common fillings were barley and talkkuna. In the 19th century, first potato and buckwheat were introduced as fillings, and later also rice and millet.\n\nToday, the most familiar and common version has a thin rye crust with a filling of rice. Butter, often mixed with chopped-up boiled egg (egg butter or \"munavoi\"), is spread over the hot pasties before eating. Mashed potato and rice-and-carrot fillings are also commonly available.\n\nKarjalanpiirakka has Traditional Speciality Guaranteed (TSG) status in Europe. This means that any product outside of specific regions and bakeries that make a similar product cannot call them \"karjalanpiirakka\" and instead call them \"riisipiirakka\" (\"rice pasties\"), \"perunapiirakka\" (\"potato pasties\") etc., depending on the filling.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "684459", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=684459", "title": "Diet Rite", "text": "Diet Rite\n\nDiet Rite is a brand of no-calorie soft drinks originally distributed by the RC Cola company.\n\nIt was introduced in 1958 and initially released as a dietetic product, but was introduced nationwide and marketed to the general public as a healthful beverage in 1962. The original formula was sweetened with cyclamate and saccharin. After cyclamate was banned in 1969, it was removed from the product. NutraSweet brand aspartame was added upon its introduction to the market, and in 1987 the saccharin was replaced entirely with together with complete elimination of caffeine. In the 1990s, several fruit-flavored varieties of Diet Rite were introduced. \n\nIn 2000, the line was reformulated yet again, this time to replace aspartame with Splenda brand sucralose and Sunett brand Acesulfame potassium. It became the first major diet soda in the United States to use neither aspartame nor saccharin as a sweetener. In 2005, \"Pure Zero\" was added to the name, and a cherry cola flavor was introduced in 2006.\n\nToday it is owned by and distributed by Keurig Dr Pepper.\n\nThe early 1960s broadcast media advertising campaign featured a jingle, sung by The Paris Sisters with the lyrics: \n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "684688", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=684688", "title": "Jing (Chinese medicine)", "text": "Jing (Chinese medicine)\n\nJīng (; Wade–Giles: ching) is the Chinese word for \"essence\", specifically kidney essence. Along with qì and shén, it is considered one of the Three Treasures \"Sanbao\" 三寶 of traditional Chinese medicine or TCM.\n\nAccording to tradition, Jīng is stored in the kidneys and is the most dense physical matter within the body (as opposed to shén which is the most volatile). It is said to be the material basis for the physical body and is \"yīn\" in nature, which means it nourishes, fuels, and cools the body. As such it is an important concept in the internal martial arts. Jīng is also believed by some to be the carrier of our heritage (similar to DNA). Production of semen, in the man, and menstrual blood (or pregnancy), in the woman, are believed to place the biggest strains on jīng. Because of this, some even equate jīng with semen, but this is inaccurate; the jīng circulates through the eight extraordinary vessels and creates marrow and semen, among other functions.\n\nJīng (精; essence) should not be confused with the related concept of jìn (勁; power), nor with jīng (經; classic/warp), which appears in many early Chinese book titles, such as the Nèi Jīng, yì jīng and Chá Jīng, the fundamental text on all the knowledge associated with tea.\n\nThe characteristics which constitute signs of good Jing (e.g. facial structure, teeth, hair, strength of adrenals or kidneys) share the embryological origin of neural crest cells. These cells undergo immense and challenging cellular migrations requiring great organisation. As such, Jing may simply represent the strength of embryological self-organisation in the organism. This will be manifestated most strongly in those cells which require most organisation; that is, the neural crest cells. \n\nOne is said to be born with a fixed amount of jīng (pre-natal jīng, also sometimes called yuan qi) and also can acquire jīng from food and various forms of stimulation (exercise, study, meditation.)\n\nTheoretically, jīng is consumed continuously in life; by everyday stress, illness, substance abuse, sexual intemperance, etc.\n\nPre-natal jīng is very difficult to be renewed, and it is said it is completely consumed upon dying.\n\nJīng is therefore considered quite important for longevity in traditional Chinese medicine (TCM); many disciplines related to qìgōng are devoted to the replenishment of \"lost\" jīng by restoration of the post-natal jīng. In particular, the internal martial arts (esp. T'ai chi ch'uan) and the Circle Walking of Baguazhang may be used to preserve pre-natal jīng and build post-natal jīng, if performed correctly. Ginseng, particularly Korean and Chinese, is said to bolster the jīng.\n\nAn early mention of the term in this sense is in a 4th-century BCE chapter called \"Neiye\" \"Inner Training\" (內業) of a larger text compiled during the Han dynasty, the Guǎnzi (管子).\n\n\n"}
{"id": "689737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=689737", "title": "Tutti", "text": "Tutti\n\nTutti is an Italian word literally meaning \"all\" or \"together\" and is used as a musical term, for the whole orchestra as opposed to the soloist. It is applied similarly to choral music, where the whole section or choir is called to sing. Music examination boards may instruct candidates to \"play in tuttis\", indicating that the candidate should play both the solo and the tutti sections.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "690984", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=690984", "title": "Shortcake", "text": "Shortcake\n\nShortcake is a sweet cake or biscuit (in the American sense: that is, a crumbly bread that has been leavened with baking powder or baking soda). The earliest recipe for shortcake is in an English cookbook from 1588. \n\nShortcake is typically made with flour, sugar, baking powder or soda, salt, butter, milk or cream, and sometimes eggs. The dry ingredients are blended, and then the butter is cut in until the mixture resembles cornmeal. The liquid ingredients are then mixed in just until moistened, resulting in a shortened dough. The dough is then dropped in spoonfuls onto a baking sheet, rolled and cut like baking powder biscuits, or poured into a cake pan, depending on how wet the dough is and the baker's preferences. Then it is baked at a relatively high temperature until set.\n\nStrawberry shortcake is a widely known dessert made with shortcake. Sliced strawberries are mixed with sugar and allowed to sit an hour or so, until the strawberries have surrendered a great deal of their juices (macerated). The shortcakes are split and the bottoms are covered with a layer of strawberries, juice, and whipped cream, typically flavored with sugar and vanilla. The top is replaced, and more strawberries and whipped cream are added onto the top. Some convenience versions of shortcake are not made with a shortcake (i.e. biscuit) at all, but instead use a base of sponge cake or sometimes a corn muffin. Japanese-style strawberry shortcakes use a sponge cake base, and are a popular Christmas treat in Japan.\n\nThe largest strawberry shortcake ever made was in the town of La Trinidad, Benguet in the Philippines on March 20, 2004. It weighed 21,213.40 lb (9622.23 kg.)\n\nThough strawberry is the most widely known shortcake dessert, peach shortcake, blueberry shortcake, chocolate shortcake and other similar desserts are made along similar lines. It is also common to see recipes where the shortcake itself is flavored; coconut is a common addition.\n\nThough today's shortcakes are usually of the biscuit or sponge-cake variety, earlier American recipes called for pie crust in rounds or broken-up pieces, which was a variety still being enjoyed in the 21st century, particularly in the South.\n\nThe first strawberry shortcake recipe appeared in an English cookbook as early as 1588, according to Driscoll's berry growers. By 1850, strawberry shortcake was a well-known biscuit and fruit dessert served hot with butter and sweetened cream. In the United States, strawberry shortcake parties were held as celebrations of the summer fruit harvest. This tradition is upheld in some parts of the United States on June 14, which is Strawberry Shortcake Day. It wasn't until 1910 that French pastry chefs replaced the topping with heavy whipped cream.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "692372", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=692372", "title": "Almond milk", "text": "Almond milk\n\nAlmond milk is a plant milk manufactured from almonds with a creamy texture and nutty flavor, although some types or brands are flavored in imitation of dairy milk. It contains neither cholesterol nor lactose, and is often consumed by those who are lactose-intolerant and others who wish to avoid dairy products, including vegans. Commercial almond milk comes in sweetened, unsweetened, plain, vanilla and chocolate flavors, and is usually fortified with micronutrients. It can also be made at home using a blender, almonds and water. \n\nSales of almond milk overtook soy milk in the United States in 2013, and by May 2014, it comprised two-thirds of the US plant milk market. In the United Kingdom, almond milk sales increased from in 2011 to in 2013.\n\nIn the Middle Ages, almond milk was known in both the Islamic world and Christendom. As a nut, almonds are permitted for consumption by these religions during Lent. Medieval historian Carolyn Walker Bynum notes that \"Medieval cookbooks suggest that the aristocracy observed fasting strictly, if legalistically. Meat-day and fish-day recipes were not separated in medieval recipe collections, as they were in later, better-organized cookbooks. But the most basic dishes were given in fast-day as well as\nordinary-day versions. For example, a thin split-pea puree, sometimes enriched with fish stock or almond milk (produced by simmering ground almonds in water), replaced meat broth on fast days; and almond milk was a general (and expensive) substitute for cow's milk.\"\nIn Persian cuisine, an almond milk based dessert called \"harireh badam\" (almond gruel) is traditionally served during Ramadan.\n\nIn the United States, almond milk remained a niche health food item until the early 2000s, when its popularity began to increase. In 2011 alone, almond milk sales increased by 79%. In 2013, it surpassed soy milk as the most popular plant-based milk in the U.S. As of 2014 it comprised 60 percent of plant-milk sales and 4.1 percent of total milk sales in the US.\n\nPopular brands of almond milk include Blue Diamond's Almond Breeze and WhiteWave Foods' Silk PureAlmond.\n\nWithin the Italian regions of Sicily, Apulia, Calabria, and Campania, almond milk is a protected traditional agricultural product.\n\nIf unfortified, almond milk has less vitamin D than fortified cows' milk; in North America cows' milk must be fortified with vitamin D, but vitamins are added to plant milks on a voluntary basis. Because of its low protein content, almond milk is not a suitable replacement for breast milk, cows' milk, or hydrolyzed formulas for children under two years of age.\n\nThe basic method of modern domestic almond milk production is to grind almonds in a blender with water, then strain out the almond pulp (flesh) with a strainer or cheesecloth. Almond milk can also be made by adding water to almond butter.\n\nIn July 2015, a class action lawsuit was placed in New York against two American manufacturers, Blue Diamond Growers and White Wave Foods, for false advertising on the product label about the small amount of almonds (only 2%) actually in the final product. In October 2015, a judge denied the consumers' request for an injunction.\n\nA majority of American almonds are grown in the state of California.The California almond acreage has increased from 36,000 bearing acres in 1920 to 840,000\nbearing acres in 2013Almond production in California is concentrated mainly in the Central Valley, where the mild climate, rich soil, abundant sunshine and water supply make for ideal growing conditions. Although,in light of the recent issues with drought in California, it has become more difficult to raise almonds in a sustainable manner. The issue becomes complex because of the high amount of water needed to produce almonds. Studies show that a single almond requires roughly of water to grow properly. The average life span of an almond orchard is 20-25 years.\n\n"}
{"id": "692672", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=692672", "title": "Snapple", "text": "Snapple\n\nSnapple is a brand of tea and juice drinks which is owned by Keurig Dr Pepper and based in Plano, Texas. The company (and brand), which was originally known as Unadulterated Food Products, was founded in 1972. The brand achieved some fame due to various pop-culture references including television shows.\n\nSnapple was founded by Leonard Marsh, Hyman Golden, and Arnold Greenberg in 1972 Valley Stream, Long Island, New York. Their company, which was originally known as Unadulterated Food Products, was first conceived as a part-time venture to supply fruit juices to health food stores. Unsure if the business would succeed, Greenberg continued to run his health food store in Manhattan's East Village, while Leonard Marsh and his brother-in-law, Hyman Golden, operated a window washing business. In a 1989 interview with \"Crain's New York Business\", Marsh admitted that when they launched the small business he knew \"as much about juice as about making an atom bomb.\"\n\nAn early apple juice product led to the company's name, Snapple. Golden, Greenberg and Marsh had created a carbonated apple juice. One of the batches of apple juice fermented in the bottle, causing the bottle caps to fly off. The original name of that particular apple juice product, \"Snapple,\" a portmanteau derived from the words \"snappy\" and \"apple,\" became the new name for their beverage company while attending Lawrence High School. Robin Greenberg had invited her boyfriend Richard Connolly to come over to her modest Valley Stream home, to help come up with a name for the new beverage her father was starting. At the table was Robin, her brother and Arnold her father. Robin's brother was snapping his fingers saying we want it to be a snappy name, Richard asked Arnold \"what's it going to taste like\" Arnold replied \"like Ocean Spray's Cranapple\", (which was perhaps the only popular non-carbonated drink at the time\") Richard replied \"if you leave \"\"apple\" in the name it will be successful, as an apple a day keeps the doctor away\"\". Hence the name Snap+apple. \n\nThe Snapple Beverage Corporation was born, beginning in the early 1980s. Snapple would not manufacture their first tea, lemon tea, until 1987.\n\nCurrently, there are many different types of Snapple: Tea ( Multiple flavors along with original and diet), juice drinks, lemonade, and bottled water. Snapple is also bottled in the form of an aluminum can.\n\nSnapple's brand slogan is \"Made from the Best Stuff on Earth.\"\n\nSnapple was known for a popular series of TV advertisements in the early 1990s featuring Wendy Kaufman (the \"Snapple Lady\") answering letters from Snapple fans. In an effort to counteract the Coke and Pepsi challenge commercials, Snapple began running a new line of advertisements in May 1992, which featured its trademark “made from the best stuff on earth” line in ads that spoofed earlier beer and sports drinks promotions; the ads received low marks from advertising industry observers. In addition, the company used its $15-million-a-year advertising budget to pay for a long-lived series of live radio commercials featuring controversial disk jockeys Howard Stern and Rush Limbaugh. At the end of the summer of 1992, Snapple conducted a five-week search for a new advertising agency that could better convey its corporate identity in preparation for a wider national push. Later that year, Snapple also signed tennis player Jennifer Capriati to endorse its products. By August 1992, Snapple had expanded its distribution to every major city in the United States and it signed new contracts with beverage distributors. The company owned no manufacturing facilities, but instead made agreements with more than 30 bottlers across the country. In this way, Snapple was able to keep its overhead low and its payroll short. The company administration consisted of just 80 employees, 50 of whom worked out of a modest office building on Long Island.\n\nThomas H. Lee, an American businessperson, financier and investor of Thomas H. Lee Partners (THL) acquired Snapple Beverages in 1992 on undisclosed terms. The three founders of Snapple, Leonard Marsh, Hyman Golden and Arnold Greenberg, said they would own about one-third of the new company and be involved in its management. Hellen Berry, vice president of the Beverage Marketing Corporation, a consultant in New York, estimated that Snapple, which had been for sale for more than a year and had $100 million in sales in 1991, sold for $140 million.Only eight months after buying the company, Lee took Snapple Beverages public and in 1994, only two years after the original acquisition, Lee sold the company to Quaker Oats for $1.7 billion. Lee was estimated to have made $900 million for himself and his investors from the sale. The Quaker Oats Company bought Snapple for $1.7 billion in 1994. The company ran into problems and sold it to Triarc in 1997 for $300 million. Triarc sold it to Cadbury Schweppes for $1.45 billion in September 2000. It was spun off in May 2008 to its current owners.\nStarting in May 2009, Snapple was made with sugar, not high fructose corn syrup. However, in certain areas, the older formula is still sold in stores, but this is becoming increasingly rare.\n\nIn 2009, a consumer lawsuit was brought against Snapple in California. The suit alleged the drinks contained unhealthy ingredients such as high fructose corn syrup and deceptive names on labels that lead consumers to believe that certain healthy elements are in the drinks that are not really present.\n\nIn 2010, in a lawsuit against Snapple in the federal District of New Jersey, the court certified to the FDA for an administrative determination the question whether high fructose corn syrup (HFCS) qualifies as a \"natural\" ingredient. In 2010, the FDA responded by letter and declined to provide the court with the requested guidance. Stating that it would take two to three years to engage in a transparent proceeding to elicit the proper public participation, the FDA again cited its limited resources and more pressing food-safety concerns.\n\nIn 2011, a New York federal court dismissed a different lawsuit accusing Snapple of misleading consumers by labeling drinks sweetened with high fructose corn syrup as \"all natural.\" The court found that the plaintiffs had failed to show that they were injured as a result of Snapple's labeling.\n\nIn October 2003, Snapple began its sponsorship of the New York City public school system (and other parcels in the area), as part of the deal to make Snapple New York City's official beverage. The company promised an $8 million per year profit for city schools if it were allowed to sell its drinks, including juice and bottled water, in school vending machines.\n\nSnapple was able to acquire the contract in part because New York City officials did not want to encourage the consumption of sodas, which have been linked to childhood obesity, diabetes and are generally considered unhealthy. The Snapple juice drinks, specifically created to meet rules banning soda and other sugary snacks from city schools, are marketed under the \"Snapple 100% Juiced!\" label. The flavors available under this brand include Green Apple, Fruit Punch, Melon Berry, Grape, Orange Mango, and Strawberry Lime. Although the juice drinks are fortified with vitamins and minerals, a 16-ounce bottle contains more sugar (41 grams) than a 12-ounce can of Coca-Cola (39 grams).\n\nDr. Michael F. Jacobson, the executive director of the Center for Science in the Public Interest, called the drinks \"little better than vitamin-fortified sugar water.\" In addition, the concentrates used in the drinks, apple, grape and pear, are the least expensive and nutritious. Dr. Toni Liquori, associate professor at the Columbia Teachers College, questioned the sale of bottled water in schools, saying \"If anything, we should have cold water in our schools.\"\n\nThe deal also gave Snapple exclusive rights to sell its tea and juice-based drinks in vending machines on all New York City properties starting in January 2004. Snapple paid the City $106 million for the rights and agreed to spend $60 million more to marketing and promotion over the length of the five-year contract.\n\nIn the early 1990s the original label graphic on the Iced Tea flavor, a depiction of the United States historical event the Boston Tea Party was replaced due to misinformation espoused by protest groups claiming the ships on the packaging were slave trading vessels in New York Harbor. Snapple also fell victim to a rumor that the small \"K\" was either a representation of the Klan, or of an imagined \"Jewish Tax\" (augmented by the fact that all three founders were Jewish). The \"K\" on the products actually meant that they were certified kosher.\n\nSnapple initially tried to quell these rumors quietly, but ultimately had to launch a media campaign to squash them, pointing out it would be bad for business to support controversial issues in such a way as the rumors implied. Through a media campaign with the NAACP, Snapple successfully fought back these rumors, although occasionally they are still brought up as fact.\n\nSnapple is well known for printing interesting numbered \"List of Snapple Real Fact facts\" on the inside of their bottle caps. A list of these \"Real Facts\" are available on the company website.\n\nSeveral of the facts on Snapple caps have been found to be outdated, incorrect or exaggerated.\n\nSnapple was the official beverage sponsor of \"America's Got Talent\" from season 7 to season 9 of the NBC show. (Howard Stern, one of the judges on the show, was a spokesperson for Snapple in the 1980s.) It was replaced by Dunkin' for season 10; Dunkin' remains sponsor of AGT today.\n\nIn 2007, Snapple opened the Snapple Theater Center on 50th Street and Broadway in the heart of New York City's Theater District. It has two theaters, one of which is a traditional theater, the other a thrust stage which can house plays. The center also includes a 40×50 ft rehearsal space which is available for rent. The theaters are considered Off-Broadway because of their low seating capacities. The theater has since dropped the \"Snapple\" name and sponsorship and is purely known as \"The Theater Center.\"\n\nMost Snapple drinks do have a Kosher certification from the OK Kosher Agency with some exceptions which include:\n\n\n"}
{"id": "694093", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=694093", "title": "Seax-Wica", "text": "Seax-Wica\n\nSeax-Wica is a tradition, or denomination, of the neopagan religion of Wicca which is largely inspired by the iconography of the historical Anglo-Saxon paganism, though, unlike Theodism, it is not a reconstruction of the early mediaeval religion itself.\n\nThe tradition was founded in 1973 by Raymond Buckland, an English-born high priest of Gardnerian Wicca who moved to the United States in the 1970s. His book, \"The Tree\", was written with the intent for it to be a definitive guide to Seax-Wica, and was published in 1974 by Samuel Weiser, and subsequently republished in 2005 as \"Buckland's Book of Saxon Witchcraft\".\n\nThe tradition primarily honours four principal deities: Woden, Thunor, Frig or Freya and Tiw. These are seen as representations of the Wiccan deities of the Horned God and the Mother Goddess. The tradition uses a minimal set of ceremonial tools, including a spear. Runes are also significant.\nSeax-Wica does not employ any secrecy oath. \"Buckland's Book of Saxon Witchcraft\" was written in mind that the reader would already be well versed in the various techniques of Witchcraft and Wiccan ritual. However, Buckland has pointed out that his \"Complete Book of Witchcraft\" gives instructions on how to proceed when no tools are available. These instructions are enough to allow one to begin, self-initiate, and consecrate one's first tools.\nSeax-Wica allows self-dedication as entry into its tradition. In the Seax tradition, covens work by a form of democracy, electing, un-electing, and re-electing coven officers, the high priest and priestess. Within ritual settings, there are the thegn, a type of sergeant-at-arms/guard/watchman, who can also be responsible for the covenstead (the meeting place of the coven), or guarding a ceremony being performed; there is also a scribe/secretary, who keeps most, if not all, of the coven's records. The word \"\"Thegn\"\", or \"\"Thane\"\" is an Anglo-Saxon title (\"Anglo-Saxon\": þeg(e)n meaning \"a servant, one who does service for another.\")\n\nBuckland was not the head of the tradition, but is respected as its founder, and continued to practice and contribute to it, until his death on September 27, 2017.\n\nThe first elected steward of Seax Wica is Wulfeage (Sean Percival) on 2006, who was elected by covens worldwide and is still steward to this day.\n\n"}
{"id": "695713", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=695713", "title": "Toothpick", "text": "Toothpick\n\nA toothpick is a small thin stick of wood, plastic, bamboo, metal, bone or other substance with at least one and sometimes two sharp ends to insert between teeth to remove detritus, usually after a meal. Toothpicks are also used for festive occasions to hold or spear small appetizers (like cheese cubes or olives) or as a cocktail stick, and can be decorated with plastic frills or small paper umbrellas or flags.\n\nKnown in all cultures, the toothpick is not just the oldest instrument for dental cleaning, but predates the arrival of early modern humans, for the skulls of Neanderthals, as well as Homo sapiens, show clear signs of teeth picked with a tool. Toothpicks made of bronze have been found as burial objects in prehistoric graves in Northern Italy and in the East Alps. In 1986, researchers in Florida discovered the 7500-year-old remains of ancient Native Americans and discovered small grooves between many of the molar teeth. One of the researchers, Justin Martin of Concordia University Wisconsin, said \"The enamel on teeth is quite tough, so they must have used the probes quite rigorously to make the grooves.\"\n\nThere are delicate, artistic examples made of silver in antiquity, as well as from mastic wood with the Romans.\n\nIn the 17th century, toothpicks were luxury objects and like jewelry, were artfully stylized using precious metal and set with expensive stones.\n\nThe first toothpick-manufacturing machine was developed in 1869, by Marc Signorello. Another was patented in 1872, by Silas Noble and J. P. Cooley.\n\nWooden toothpicks are cut from birch wood. Logs are first spiral cut into thin sheets, which are then cut, chopped, milled and bleached (to lighten) into the individual toothpicks. Plastic toothpicks, also called dental pics, are still made in America in Georgia, by Armond's Manufacturing. The Mayo Clinic recommends using a dental pic in lieu of a wooden toothpick to clean one's teeth, as they clean more effectively and one does not risk injuring the gums.\nNowadays other means of dental hygiene are preferred such as dental floss and toothbrushes.\n\nIn September 2012, Ed Cahill set a world record in Ireland by placing 3,107 toothpicks in his beard in just under three hours.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "696020", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=696020", "title": "Permanent press", "text": "Permanent press\n\nPermanent press is the term given to a characteristic of fabric that has been chemically processed to resist wrinkles and hold its shape. Alternative terms include wrinkle resistant, wash and wear, no-iron,\ndurable press, and easy care. This treatment has a lasting effect on the fabric.\n\nThe crosslinking agents that result in the permanent press finish are often derivatives of urea. Popular crosslinkers include DMDHEU (dimethylol dihydroxyethyleneurea) and DMEU (dimethylol ethylene urea).\n\nAdvances in producing permanent press fabrics involved a series of agents that crosslink the cellulose-based fibers that comprise most clothing. Initial agents included formaldehyde. Starting in the 1940s, a series of urea-formaldehyde derivatives were introduced. Technical issues overcome included yellowing, odor, and the tendency of some agents to accelerate the degradation of fabrics by bleaches. In 1953, Brooks Brothers manufactured wash-and-wear shirts using a blend of Dacron, polyester, and a wrinkle free cotton that was invented by Ruth R. Benerito, which they called \"Brooksweave\".\n\nThe technology advanced especially rapidly in the early 1990s.\n\nIn older washing machines, the permanent press setting sprays moisture during the spin cycle to maintain the moisture content of the permanent press fabrics above a certain specified limit to reduce wrinkling. Most older clothes dryers feature an automatic permanent press setting, which puts clothes through a cool-down cycle at the end of the normal heated drying cycle. Modern dryers tend to include this as a standard feature.\n"}
{"id": "696986", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=696986", "title": "Assistive cane", "text": "Assistive cane\n\nAn assistive cane is a walking stick used as a crutch or mobility aid.\n\nCanes can help redistribute weight from a lower leg that is weak or painful, improve stability by increasing the base of support, and provide tactile information about the ground to improve balance. In the US, ten percent of adults older than 65 years use canes, and 4.6 percent use walkers.\n\nIn contrast to crutches, canes are generally lighter, but, because they transfer the load through the user's unsupported wrist, are unable to offload equal loads from the legs.\n\nAnother type of crutch is the walker, a frame held in front of the user and which the user leans on during movement. Walkers are more stable due to their increased area of ground contact, but are larger and less wieldy and, like canes, pass the full load through the user's wrists in most cases.\n\nThe basic cane has four parts. These parts vary depending on the design of the cane and the needs of the user.\n\nModern canes may differ from the traditional fixed structure. For instance, a quad cane has a base attached to the shaft that provides increased stability by having four ferrules, and an adjustable cane may have two shaft segments telescoping one inside the other to allow adjustment for multiple sizes.\n\nAll cane users who need a walking cane for medical reasons should consult a medical professional before choosing the style that best suits them. It is particularly important that the cane is the proper height for the individual user.\n\n\n\nCanes are generally held in the hand that is opposite to the side of the injury or weakness. It allows the cane to be used for stability in a way that lets the user focus much of their weight away from their weaker side and onto the cane. This prevents the person's center of balance from swaying from side to side as they walk. It also allows for fluid movement that better matches walking, as the hand on the opposite side of the leg generally sways forward in normal human locomotion . Personal preference, or a need to hold the cane in the dominant hand means some cane users choose to hold the cane on the same side as the affected leg.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "697115", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=697115", "title": "Gákti", "text": "Gákti\n\nGákti is the Northern Sámi word for a piece of traditional clothing worn by the Sámi in northern areas of Norway, Sweden, Finland and the Kola Peninsula in Russia. The gákti is worn both in ceremonial contexts and while working, particularly when herding reindeer. The traditional Sami outfit is characterized by a dominant color adorned with bands of contrasting colours, plaits, pewter embroidery, tin art, and often a high collar. In the Norwegian language the garment is called a 'kofte', and in Swedish it is called 'kolt'.\n\nThe colours, patterns and decorations of the costume can signify a person's marital status and geographical origin. There are different gákti for women and men; men's gáktis are shorter at the hem than women's. Traditionally the gákti was made from reindeer skin, but in modern times, wool, cotton or silk are more common. The gákti can be worn with a belt (pleated, quilted or with silver buttons), silver jewellery, traditional leather footwear and a silk scarf. Traditionally, if the buttons on the belt are square, it shows the wearer is married. If they are round, the person is unmarried. If a married couple divorce, and the ex-husband still continues to use the Sami costume made by his ex-wife, he states by this that he wants her back. \n\nInari Sámi: mááccuh\n\nSkolt Sámi: määccaǩ\n\nSouth Sámi: Gaeptie\n\n\n"}
{"id": "697505", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=697505", "title": "Profiterole", "text": "Profiterole\n\nA profiterole (), cream puff (US), or chou à la crème () is a filled French choux pastry ball with a typically sweet and moist filling of whipped cream, custard, pastry cream, or ice cream. The puffs may be decorated or left plain or garnished with chocolate sauce, caramel, or a dusting of powdered sugar. Savory profiterole are also made, filled with pureed meats, cheese, and so on. These were formerly common garnishes for soups. This pastry is popular in Indonesia and called as kue sus.\n\nThe various names may be associated with particular variants of filling or sauce in different places.\n\nChoux pastry dough is piped through a pastry bag or dropped with a pair of spoons into small balls and baked to form largely hollow puffs. After cooling, the baked profiteroles are injected with filling using a pastry bag and narrow piping tip, or by slicing off the top, filling them, and reassembling. For sweet profiteroles, additional glazes or decorations may then be added.\n\nThe most common presentations are pastry cream, whipped cream, or ice cream filling, topped with powdered sugar or chocolate ganache and possibly more whipped cream. They are also served plain, with a crisp caramel glaze, iced, or with fruit.\n\nFilled and glazed with caramel, they are assembled into a type of pièce montée called croquembouches, often served at weddings in France and Italy, during the Christmas holiday in France, and are served during important celebrations in Gibraltar. Profiteroles are also used as the outer wall of St. Honoré Cake.\n\nThe word \"profiterole\" (also spelled prophitrole, profitrolle, profiterolle) has existed in English since 1604, borrowed from French. The original meaning in both English and French is unclear, but later it came to mean a kind of roll \"baked under the ashes\". A 17th-century French recipe for a \"Potage de profiteolles\" or \"profiterolles\" describes a soup of dried small breads (presumably the profiteroles) simmered in almond broth and garnished with coxscombs, truffles, and so on. The current meaning is only clearly attested in the 19th century.\n\nThe \"cream puff\" has appeared on US restaurant menus since at least 1851.\n\nProfiteroles are a national dish of Gibraltar.\n\n"}
{"id": "698714", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=698714", "title": "Custard pie", "text": "Custard pie\n\nA custard pie is any type of uncooked custard mixture added to an uncooked or partially cooked crust and baked together. In North America, custard pie commonly refers to a plain mixture of milk, eggs, sugar, salt, vanilla extract and sometimes nutmeg combined with a pie crust. It is distinctly different from a cream pie, which contains cooked custard poured into a cooled, precooked crust. In the United Kingdom, the comical or political act of pieing is conventionally done with a \"custard pie\". Some common custard pies include pumpkin pie, lemon and buttermilk chess pie, and coconut custard. True custard is defined as a liquid thickened with eggs. Due to the often large number of whole eggs in custard pie it is a very rich pie.\n\nThe Ancient Romans were the first to understand the binding properties of eggs. During the Middle Ages, the first custard pies, as we know them, began to appear. Initially, custards were used only as fillings for pies, pastries and tarts. Both Europe and Asia had recipes that contained custards. The word custard is derived from ‘crustade’ which is a tart with a crust. After the 16th century, custards began to be used in individual dishes rather than as a filling in crusts.\n\nToday, custards are used as filling in pies and tarts, and as individual dishes. Ideally a custard pie should be light and delicate, but still have good body. Custards can be made in two ways: baked or stirred upon the stove, but most custard pie recipes call for baking. The eggs in custard mixtures, when cooked, turn from liquid to solid. If cooked over excessive heat, the eggs will curdle, which is extremely undesirable. Curdling can be prevented by using lower temperatures and stirring. As such, making true custard pie is a very delicate process.\n\nIn British English, pies thrown or pushed into the face are usually referred to as \"custard pies\". Custard pies are used as a comedic device by clowns in many circus performances, in practical jokes for harmless fun and also for throwing into the faces of public figures as a sign of disapproval. UK Saturday morning programme Tiswas had custard pies as a regular feature and even had a character called The Phantom Flan Flinger, a masked man who pied people. The World Custard Pie Throwing Championships take place annually in the village of Coxheath in Kent, England.\n\n"}
{"id": "699247", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=699247", "title": "Oscar Mayer", "text": "Oscar Mayer\n\nThe Oscar Mayer Company is an American meat and cold cut production company, owned by the American food company Kraft Heinz. It is known for its hot dogs, bologna, bacon, ham, and Lunchables products.\n\nGerman immigrant Oscar F. Mayer (1859–1955), born in Kösingen, Germany, began working at a meat market in Detroit, Michigan, and later in Chicago, Illinois. In 1883, Mayer and his brother Gottfried leased the Kolling Meat Market on the near-northside of Chicago. The Mayer brothers sold bratwurst, liverwurst, and weißwurst, which were popular in the predominantly German neighborhoods around their Chicago meat market.\n\nAs the meat market's popularity grew, it expanded its storefront and participated in sponsoring local events including the 1893 Chicago World's Fair. By 1900, the company had 43 employees and Chicago-wide delivery service. In 1904, Oscar Mayer began branding its meats to capitalize on their popularity, beginning an industry-wide trend. Early company specialties were \"Old World\" sausages and Westphalian hams, soon followed by bacon and wieners. In 1906, Oscar Mayer & Co. was among the first to volunteer to join the newly created federal meat inspection program. In 1919, the company made its first major expansion, with the purchase of a processing plant in Madison, Wisconsin. The plant quickly proved to be a profitable, efficient operation, and in 1919 Madison became the corporate headquarters.\n\nFor nearly a century, Oscar Mayer remained an independent company owned primarily by descendants of the Mayer brothers who started it. In 1981, Oscar Mayer stockholders elected to sell the company to General Foods. Four years later, Philip Morris acquired General Foods, and in 1989 merged General Foods with the newly acquired Kraft Foods Inc.\nShares of Kraft foods were first offered to the public via an initial public offering in 2001. Altria Group (formerly Philip Morris) spun off remaining shares of Kraft Foods to Altria shareholders in 2007.\n\nOn November 4, 2015, owner Kraft Heinz announced it would move the Oscar Mayer headquarters and the company's U.S. meats business from Madison to Chicago. The company also announced plans to consolidate its production facilities during the two following years, resulting in the shutdown of seven North American manufacturing facilities: Fullerton, California, San Leandro, California, Federalsburg, Maryland, St. Marys, Ontario, Campbell, New York, Lehigh Valley, Pennsylvania; and Madison.\n\nIn August 2017,\" Bloomberg Businessweek\" reported that the company planned to spend $10 million to reinvent the hot dog for a more health-conscious consumer. According to company research, this new strategy could increase sales of their hot dogs by 6%.\n\nOscar Mayer had several advertisements on TV involving young children, including the Oscar Mayer Wiener ad in 1965. The commercial shows a young girl leading a group of children, singing about what they would get if they \"were an Oscar Mayer wiener\". It was written by Richard D. Trentlage.\n\nA 1974 TV commercial featured 4-year-old Andy Lambros holding a fishing rod and sandwich while singing, \"My bologna has a first name, it's 'O-S-C-A-R'...\". It became one of the longest-running TV commercials in the country.\n\nOscar Mayer is known for its Wienermobile, which has toured the United States for over 70 years. The first Wienermobile was created in 1936.\n\n"}
{"id": "699441", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=699441", "title": "Avidya (Hinduism)", "text": "Avidya (Hinduism)\n\nAvidyā is a Sanskrit word whose literal meaning is ignorance, misconceptions, misunderstandings, incorrect knowledge, and it is the opposite of \"Vidya\". It is used extensively in Hindu texts, including the Upanishads, and in other Indian religions such as Buddhism and Jainism, particularly in the context of metaphysical reality.\n\nAvidyā, in all Dharmic systems, represents fundamental ignorance and misperception of the phenomenal world. However, the Indian religions disagree on the details, for example with Hinduism considering a denial and misconceptions of Atman (soul, self) as a form of Avidya, and Buddhism considering the denial and misconceptions of An-atman (non-soul, non-self) as a form of Avidya.\n\n\"Avidyā\" (अविद्या) is a Vedic Sanskrit word, and is a compound of \"a\" and \"vidya\", meaning \"not vidya\". The word \"vidya\" is derived from the Sanskrit root \"Vid\", which means \"to know, to perceive, to see, to understand\". Therefore, \"avidya\" means to \"not know, not perceive, not understand\". The \"Vid*\"-related terms appears extensively in the Rigveda and other Vedas. Avidya is usually rendered as \"ignorance\" in English translations of ancient Indian texts, sometimes as \"spiritual ignorance\".\n\nThe word avidyā is derived from the Proto-Indo-European root *\"weid\"-, meaning \"to see\" or \"to know\". It is a cognate of Latin \"vidēre\" (which would turn to \"video\") and English \"wit\".\n\nWhile Avidya found in Indian philosophies is translated as \"ignorance\", states Alex Wayman, this is a mistranslation because Avidya means more than ignorance. He suggests the term \"unwisdom\" to be a better rendition. The term includes not only ignorance out of darkness, but also obscuration, misconceptions, mistaking illusion to be reality or impermanent to be permanent or suffering to be bliss or non-self to be self (delusions). Incorrect knowledge is another form of Avidya, states Wayman.\n\nAvidya represents fundamental ignorance, state Jones and Ryan, a misperception of the phenomenal world. In Hinduism, Avidya includes confusing the mundane reality to be the only reality, and it as a permanent though it is ever changing. Its doctrines assert that there is a spiritual reality consisting of Atman-Brahman, one that is the true, eternal, imperishable reality beyond time.\n\nAvidya in the earliest Vedic texts is ignorance, and in later Vedic texts evolves to include anything that is a \"positive hindrance\" to spiritual or nonspiritual knowledge. In the Upanishads, the concept includes \"lack of knowledge, inadequate knowledge and false knowledge\".\n\nThe effect of avidya is to suppress the real nature of things and present something else in its place. In effect it is not different from Maya (pronounced Māyā) or illusion. Avidya relates to the individual Self (\"Ātman\"), while Maya is an adjunct of the cosmic Self (\"Brahman\"). In both cases it connotes the principle of differentiation of an experienced reality into the subject ('I') and an object, as is implicit in human thinking. Avidya stands for that delusion which breaks up the original unity (refer: nonduality) of what is real and presents it as subject and object and as doer and result of the deed. What keeps humanity captive in Samsara is this avidya. This ignorance,\"the ignorance veiling our true self and the truth of the world\", is not lack of erudition; it is ignorance about the nature of 'Being' (\"Sat\"). It is a limitation that is natural to human sensory or intellectual apparatus. This is responsible for all the misery of humanity. Advaita Vedanta holds that the eradication of it should be humanity's only goal and that will automatically mean realisation of the Self (\"Ātman\").\n\nAdi Shankara says in his Introduction to his commentary on the Brahma Sutras, \"Owing to an absence of discrimination, there continues a natural human behaviour in the form of 'I am this' or 'This is mine'; this is avidya. It is a superimposition of the attributes of one thing on another. The ascertainment of the nature of the real entity by separating the superimposed thing from it is vidya (knowledge, illumination)\". In Shankara's philosophy avidya cannot be categorized either as 'absolutely existent' or as 'absolutely non-existent'.\n\n"}
{"id": "699550", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=699550", "title": "Saimin", "text": "Saimin\n\nSaimin is a noodle soup dish developed by different immigrant groups in Hawaii. Inspired by Japanese ramen, Chinese mein, and Filipino pancit, saimin was developed during Hawaii's plantation era. It is a soup dish that consists of soft wheat egg noodles served in hot \"dashi\" garnished with green onions. \"Kamaboko\", \"cha siu\", sliced Spam, \"linguiça\", and \"nori\", among other additions.\n\nSaimin shares a great deal in common with Okinawa Soba with regard to noodles and broth, with the biggest difference being the toppings. China and Okinawa had close relations at one time. It is possible that an alternate explanation for the origin of saimin comes from the historical relationship between the two Asian cultures.\n\nJapanese pot stickers, called \"gyoza\", as well as Chinese \"wonton\" may be substituted for or added to the dish's noodles for special occasions. A pan-fried version, primarily inspired by Filipino \"pancit\", is also popular, especially at carnivals, fairgrounds, and catered parties.\n\nSaimin is a compound of two Chinese words : (pinyin: \"xì\", jyutping: \"sai\"), meaning thin, and (\"miàn\", \"min\"), meaning noodle. Saimin actually came from China which is how they have the characters. Saimin is recognized as a traditional dish in Hawaii, taking into consideration the various cultural contributions in its creation. The first Asian immigrants to Hawaii were the Chinese from Southern China to trade for sandalwood with the Hawaiians. The second migration of Chinese came to work on the sugarcane plantations. The dish is composed of elements taken from each of the original sugarcane and pineapple plantation laborer ethnicities of the early 20th century: The noodles are of Chinese origin made with Japanese dashi (broth) with ingredients from both cuisines such as cha siu, eggs, and green onions. Through the years, various ingredients are widely accepted to be added into this multicultural dish.\n\nAs plantation laborers returned from the fields, communal meals were informally prepared. It is believed that on some occasions, a Filipino family may have had extra green onions growing in their yard, the Portuguese had some sausage, the Hawaiians had a couple of extra eggs, and the Korean had some cabbage left over from making kimchi. At this point, they would all throw their ingredients into the pot and share what was created. It may be through these communal meals that saimin was born.\n\nSaimin was first popularized as a fast food dish on the plantations and in the twentieth century at Honolulu Stadium. It is served at all sporting venues alongside hot dogs and hamburgers at popular national fast food chains and restaurants throughout the islands. A healthy alternative to most school meals, several public schools offer saimin as a regular option for students.\n\nSeveral saimin establishments including saimin noodle factories and restaurants have become local landmarks in Hawaii and have attracted out-of-state visitors who have ventured off the traditional tourist-beaten paths. Many of these establishments have been officially designated by the State of Hawaii as places of historic interest. Among such establishments are Palace Saimin, Likelike Drive Inn and Washington Saimin on Oahu, and Hamura's Saimin on Kauai, which was given the James Beard Foundation's America's Classic honor in 2006.\nMcDonald's, an American fast-food giant based in Oak Brook, Illinois became aware of the saimin phenomenon in the Hawaiian islands in the late 1960s. Maurice J. \"Sully\" Sullivan, legendary Hawaii entrepreneur and owner of Foodland Super Market Limited, had purchased and opened the first McDonald's restaurant in Hawaii in 1968 at his flagship grocery store. He opened several more McDonald's franchises, and for 12 straight months, McDonald's Hawaii became the highest grossing group of franchises in the world. Sullivan wanted to serve his favorite meal, saimin, at his McDonald's restaurants, knowing all too well that his restaurants would boom with its introduction to the menu.\n\nSullivan invited executives from the McDonald's corporation, including owner and business tycoon Ray Kroc for dinner at two family-owned, \"hole-in-the-wall\" saimin stands in Honolulu. They ate at Palace Saimin, Washington Saimin and Boulevard Saimin. That night, Sullivan convinced Kroc to expand McDonald's menu for the first time in its corporate history to include a local \"ethnic\" food. Researchers worked extensively with \"Washington Saimin\" to develop a recipe for McDonald's Hawaii. Sullivan secured deals with Ajinomoto, a local Japanese saimin noodle factory and fishcake supplier, to manufacture a special soup base.\n\nToday, saimin is one of McDonald's Hawaii restaurant's most popular menu items. Later, Sullivan introduced breakfast platters consisting of Portuguese sausage, eggs, and steamed white rice; Spam, eggs, and rice; and a Breakfast deluxe, a combination of the two, to his menu, capitalizing on the local food phenomena.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "699555", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=699555", "title": "Quavers", "text": "Quavers\n\nQuavers are a British snack food, originally made by Smiths, and now produced by Walkers. Walkers, owned by PepsiCo, purchased the Quavers brand in 1997, when it became one of the Frito Lay International brand names.\n\nQuavers were launched in 1968 with the advertising slogan \"you get a lovely lot of Quavers in a bag\". Packaging described them as \"curly potato puffs\".\n\nIn 2007, Walkers changed the packaging for all their snack products, which were Quavers, Wotsits, Squares, French Fries and Monster Munch. This packaging reflected the usage of Sunseed Oil, which was used in all products. The Multipack bags were in a different layout, being in Landscape style. Quavers' logo was changed slightly, and the flavours remained the same.\n\nIn 2009, Quavers, Squares, Wotsits and French Fries had all changed their packaging again because of a reduction in calories. Quavers has 87 calories in the Cheese flavour.\n\nIn 2011, Quavers packaging updated to a brighter bag colour with the Walkers logo on the packets again.\n\nThe primary ingredient in Quavers is potato starch. They are deep fried to give a snack with a similar texture to Krupuk (prawn crackers), but have a different flavour and are smaller with a curled-up rectangle shape (similar in cross-section to a quaver). Originally only available in cheese and smoky bacon flavours, the product line now contains three flavours: cheese, prawn cocktail and salt and vinegar. Ketchup and sweet and sour flavours were also introduced, but for a limited time only and are no longer available.\n\nA one pack (16.4 g) serving of regular Quavers contains 88 calories, of which 44 are from fat. Quavers contain a mixture of fats (4.9g): saturated fat 0.4g, polyunsaturated fat 0.6g and monounsaturated fat 3.8g. The sodium content is 170mg. Quavers have 88 calories in their Cheese flavour and 86 in the salt and vinegar variety.\n\nThere was also a Cheese and Onion flavour in the 1980s which, although proved very popular, was discontinued.\n\nThe first mascot of Quavers was a hyperactive cartoon dog named 'Colin Curly', created by Bob Lawrie and voiced by Lenny Henry who featured in many TV commercials. Colin also appeared in two Amiga and Atari ST puzzle games: \"Pushover\" (1992) and its sequel, \"One Step Beyond\" (1993), both published by Ocean.\n\nThe second was a boy named Quentin Quaverhead and his family. They were first seen in a memorable advertisement shown in 1996 (animated by Aardman), which featured Quentin trying to catch a Quaver that had blown out of his bedroom window, ending with the slogan \"They're floaty light!\"\n"}
{"id": "699687", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=699687", "title": "Cantrip", "text": "Cantrip\n\nCantrip is a word of Scots origin to mean a magical spell of any kind, or one which reads the same forwards and backwards. It can also be a witch's trick, or a sham. It is possibly derived from the Gaelic \"canntaireachd\", a piper's mnemonic chant.\n\nIn the \"Dungeons & Dragons\" role-playing game, it is a type of minor spell that generally is the simplest and weakest kind available to learn. (\"Most cantrips are simple little spells of no great effect, so... knowledge and information pertaining to these small magics are discarded in favor of the more powerful spells when available.\") The differences, in terms of game mechanics, between cantrips and more powerful spells have changed from edition to edition.\n\nIn the trading card game \"\", a cantrip is player jargon to refer to a spell that, in addition to any other effect, makes you draw a card.\n"}
{"id": "700592", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=700592", "title": "Saag", "text": "Saag\n\nSaag () () () () or saga is a leaf-based (spinach, mustard leaf, collard greens, basella, etc.) dish eaten in the Indian subcontinent with bread such as roti or naan, or rice (in Nepal, Odisha, Kashmir and West Bengal). Saag can be made from spinach, mustard leaves, finely chopped broccoli, or other greens, along with added spices and sometimes other ingredients such as paneer. It is occasionally referred to as saagwala.\n\nSaaga is common in the state of Odisha, where it is eaten with Pakhala, and West Bengal and regions of North India, where the most common dish is sarson da saag (mustard plant leaves), which may be eaten with makki di roti. It is also eaten in Nepal and in Haryana. This roti is made of maize flour and is yellow in colour, though it can also be eaten with other breads. Saag/saj however can be a catch-all term for various green-leaved dishes. It is one of the important dish of Mahaprasad (Jagannath Temple), where it has been served to the Lords for centuries. Saag aloo (spinach potato) and saag gosht (spinach and goat) is a common dish in Punjabi cuisine as served in restaurants and take-aways in the Western world (where the goat is commonly replaced with lamb). However, as many people are vegetarian, saag is eaten as it is plain, with the yellow roti or naan. It consists of leafy greens such as spinach, broccoli, kale, and others.\n\nIn Odia cuisine, sāga is one of the most important vegetables. It is popular all over the state. A large varieties of plants are used as sāga in Odisha. A list of the plants that are used as sāga is as below.\n\nIn Bengali cuisine, sāg is one of the most important vegetables. It is popular all over the state. Most of the Bengalis use at least one sāg everyday during lunch. They eat sāg fried or little gravy (jhol) with rice. A list of the plants that are used as sāg is as below. \n\n\n"}
{"id": "700699", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=700699", "title": "Moussaka", "text": "Moussaka\n\nMoussaka (, or ) is an eggplant- (aubergine) or potato-based dish, often including ground meat, in the Levant, Middle East, and Balkans, with many local and regional variations.\n\nThe most famous version of the dish today appeared in the 1920s with the publishing of Nikolaos Tselementes' culinary book in Greece. Many versions have a top layer made of milk-based sauce thickened with egg (custard) or flour (béchamel sauce). In Greece, the dish is layered and typically served hot. In Turkey, thinly sliced eggplant is fried and served in a tomato-based meat sauce. Turkish \"mussaka\" may be consumed warm or at room temperature. In the Arab countries it is often eaten cold, but is also served hot in some regions.\n\nThe English name for moussaka has Arabic origin \"musaqqa‘a\" (), literally 'that which is fed liquid'. It was reborrowed from Greek \"\" () and from other Balkan languages, all of which borrowed the word from Ottoman. The word is first attested in English in 1862, written \"mùzàkkà\".\n\nMost versions are based primarily on sautéed aubergine (eggplant) and tomato, usually with minced meat, mostly lamb. However, the Greek version includes layers of meat and eggplant topped with a Béchamel (\"white\") sauce, and baked. It seems likely that the Greek moussaka has Arab origins and is related to the Levantine musakhkhan, with the word moussaka derived from this Arab word.\n\nThe modern Greek version was created by the French-trained Greek chef Nikolaos Tselementes in the 1920s. A classic recipe has three layers that are separately cooked before being combined for the final baking: a bottom layer of sliced eggplant sautéed in olive oil; a middle layer of ground lamb lightly cooked with chopped or puréed tomatoes, onion, garlic, and spices (cinnamon, allspice and black pepper); and a top layer of Béchamel sauce or savoury custard. The composed dish is then layered into a pan and baked until the top layer is browned. Moussaka is usually served warm, not piping hot; if cut hot out of the oven, moussaka squares tend to slide apart and consequently the dish needs some resting time to firm up before serving. Reheating, however, does not present the same problem.\n\nThere are variations on this basic recipe, sometimes with no top sauce, sometimes with other vegetables. Such variants may include, in addition to the eggplant slices, sautéed zucchini (courgette) slices, part-fried potato slices, or sautéed mushrooms. There is a fast-day (vegan) version in Tselementes' cookbook, which includes neither meat nor dairy products, just vegetables (ground eggplant is used instead of ground meat), tomato sauce, and bread crumbs.\n\nAnother variant is \"\" (\"lit.\" 'eggplant, little shoe style') which consists of whole small eggplant stuffed with ground meat and topped with béchamel and baked.\n\nIn the Levant, moussaka is a cooked dish made up primarily of tomatoes and eggplant, similar to Sicilian caponata, and may also include chickpeas. It may be served cold as a mezze dish, or hot.\n\nThe Egyptian version of moussaka is made from layers of fried eggplant immersed in tomato sauce and then baked. A layer of seasoned cooked ground beef is usually added between the eggplant before baking. The dish can be served hot but is usually chilled for a day or so to improve the taste.\n\nTurkish ' is not layered. Instead, thinly sliced eggplant is fried and served in tomato-based meat sauce seasoned with green peppers, garlic and onions. It is generally eaten with ' and . There are also variants with zucchini ('), carrots (') and potatoes (\"\").\n\nIn Albania, Bulgaria, the former Yugoslavia, and Romania, potatoes are used instead of eggplant, pork or beef mince, and the top layer is usually milk or yogurt mixed with raw eggs, sometimes with a small amount of flour added. There is also a three-layer version: the bottom layer consists of ground pork and beef, the middle layer of potato slices, and the top layer is typically a custard. Each layer is cooked on its own and layered in a pan and baked until the top is browned.\n\nThe Romanian version is made usually with potatoes or eggplant or cabbage. The layers start with the vegetable, then the layer of meat (usually pork), then vegetables, until the pot is full. Sometimes bread crumbs are used for toppings, sometimes slices of tomatoes and crushed cheese. The pot is then filled with tomato sauce. There is also a pasta variant, with pasta being used instead of vegetables. The \"fasting\" variant, which is vegan, replaces meat with mushrooms or a mix of sautéed onions and rice.\n\nIn the rest of the Balkans, the top layer is often a custard: this is the version introduced in the UK by Elizabeth David's \"Mediterranean Cookery\" and where it remains the usual presentation. Grated cheese or bread crumbs are often sprinkled on top.\n\n"}
{"id": "701532", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=701532", "title": "Gewehr", "text": "Gewehr\n\nGewehr is the German word for a rifle. Previous to the 1840s, rifled guns were not widespread, usually muzzle-loading and termed \"Büchse\", as they are still in German hunting jargon today. Afterwards, \"Gewehr\" became the standard term for military-type rifles.\n\nThe term \"Gewehr\" can be encountered in the context of 19th and 20th century military history for nonspecific rifles from German-speaking countries, e.g. in arms trade, in particular for types produced before German unification in 1871.\n\nSpecific types, sorted chronologically from 1841 to 1997 and with designer given, are:\n\n"}
{"id": "703788", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=703788", "title": "Potassium benzoate", "text": "Potassium benzoate\n\nPotassium benzoate (E212), the potassium salt of benzoic acid, is a food preservative that inhibits the growth of mold, yeast and some bacteria. It works best in low-pH products, below 4.5, where it exists as benzoic acid. \n\nAcidic foods and beverages such as fruit juice (citric acid), sparkling drinks (carbonic acid), soft drinks (phosphoric acid), and pickles (vinegar) may be preserved with potassium benzoate. It is approved for use in most countries including Canada, the U.S., and the EU, where it is designated by the E number E212.\n\nPotassium benzoate is also used in the whistle in many fireworks.\n\nOne very common way to make potassium benzoate is by oxidizing toluene to benzoic acid followed by a neutralization with potassium hydroxide. Another way to synthesize potassium benzoate in the lab setting is by hydrolyzing methyl benzoate with potassium hydroxide.\n\nThe mechanism of food preservation begins with the absorption of benzoic acid into the cell. If the intracellular pH changes to 5 or lower, the anaerobic fermentation of glucose through phosphofructokinase is decreased by 95%.\n\nPotassium benzoate has low acute toxicity upon oral and dermal exposure. The Food Commission, which campaigns for safer, healthier food in the UK, describes potassium benzoate as \"mildly irritant to the skin, eyes and mucous membranes\". \n\nCats have a significantly lower tolerance to benzoic acid and its salts than rats and mice.\n\nUnder certain circumstances, such as in the presence of ascorbic acid, benzoate salts can produce benzene in soft drinks. The US Food and Drug Administration states the levels of benzene measured do not pose a safety concern for consumers.\n\nThe carbon-13 NMR shows 5 unique peaks. There are four peaks between 130-140 ppm from the carbon atoms in the benzene ring. There is an additional carbon peak around 178 ppm representing the carbon atom from the carbonyl group.\n\nThe following are the main peaks in the IR spectrum.\n\n"}
{"id": "704490", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=704490", "title": "Smarties", "text": "Smarties\n\nSmarties are a colour-varied sugar-coated chocolate confectionery. They have been manufactured since 1937, originally by H.I. Rowntree & Company in the UK, and are currently produced by Nestlé.\n\nSmarties are oblate spheroids with a minor axis of about 5 mm (0.2 in) and a major axis of about 12 mm (0.5 in). They come in eight colours: red, orange, yellow, green, blue, mauve, pink and brown, although the blue variety was temporarily replaced by a white variety in some countries, while an alternative natural colouring dye of the blue colour was being researched.\n\nSmarties are not distributed (except via import) in the United States, where the rights to the name belong to the Smarties Candy Company, which manufactures its own hard tablet sweet under the registered trademark name \"Smarties\".\n\nA similar product has been produced by Kneisl company in Holešov, Moravia, since 1907. Several years later, the name \"Lentilky\" was used and registered by Philipp Kneisl, founder of the Holešov factory, later renamed to \"Sfinx\". Subsequently, it was produced prevalently in Holešov as well within Czechoslovakia, and afterwards also in separated the Czech Republic (and it is distributed also in Slovakia, Hungary, Germany, the United Kingdom and the Netherlands), as \"Lentilky\" under the Sfinx or Orion brand, which fall under Nestlé since 1992. This name is also used in some Latin American countries (e.g., Lentejas in Peru).\n\nRowntree's of York, England, have been making \"Chocolate Beans\" since at least 1882. The product was renamed \"Smarties Chocolate Beans\" in 1937. Rowntree's was forced to drop the words \"chocolate beans\" in 1937 due to trading standards requirements (the use of the word \"beans\" was felt to be misleading) so adopted the \"Milk Chocolate in a Crisp Sugar Shell\". Later, the sweet was rebranded as \"Smarties\".\n\nSmarties in the UK were traditionally sold in cylindrical cardboard tubes, capped with a colourful plastic lid usually having a letter of the alphabet on it. The purpose of this, according to a Rowntree's spokesperson in the 1980s, was for them to be useful as a teaching aid to encourage young children to recognise the letters. Over the last 25 years, Nestlé and Rowntree's have manufactured five billion Smarties lids. Some lids are very rare and are now regarded as collectors' items.\n\nIn February 2005, the Smarties tube was replaced with a hexagonal design. The rationale behind changing the design was, according to Nestlé, to make the brand \"fresh and appealing\" to youngsters; the new packaging is also lighter and more compact, and the lid (which is now a hinged piece of cardboard) has a card clip which holds the lid shut when it is folded over. The new lid still features a letter like the old plastic lids, but it is in the form of a \"what [letter] is a [thing]?\" question similar to those asked on the TV show Blockbusters (which coincidentally were on hexagonal tiles), the answer for which can be read when the lid is open, next to the hole giving access to the rest of the tube. The hexagonal box is made of one piece of card which is diecut then folded and glued. The hexagon can also be stacked in many layers without the pile collapsing, which is an advantage at the point of sale. The last 100 tubes to leave the factory in York had a certificate inside them.\n\nSmarties are no longer manufactured in York; in October 2007, production was moved to Germany, where a third of them were already made. Outside Europe, Nestlé's largest production facility for Smarties is in Canada, where Nestlé has been manufacturing products since 1918. Canadian-made Smarties have a noticeably thicker shell than their European variants.\n\nIn 1998, Nestle obtained a trademark for a tubular Smarties package. It later sued Master Foods in Denmark, which was marketing M&M minis in a similar package. The Supreme Court of Denmark ruled that a basic geometrical shape could not be trademarked and ordered the trademark to be removed from the trademark register.\n\nIn one of the earlier ranges of colours there was a light-brown Smartie. This was replaced in 1988 by the blue Smartie. Before 1958, dark-brown Smarties had a plain-chocolate centre, while light-brown ones were coffee-flavoured. The orange Smarties contained orange-flavoured chocolate, however these days the orange flavour is added to the shell only.\n\nIn 2006 it was announced that Nestlé were removing all artificial colourings from Smarties in the United Kingdom. Nestlé decided to replace all synthetic dyes with natural ones, but, unable to source a natural blue dye, removed blue Smarties from circulation (which led to the common misunderstanding that the blue Smartie triggered hyperactivity in some children) and replaced them with white ones. In February 2008, blue smarties were reintroduced using natural blue dye derived from the cyanobacterium spirulina instead of the controversial Brilliant Blue FCF (FD&C Blue 1, E133).\n\nArtificial colouring was removed from Smarties on the Canadian market in March 2009. The new range included all the colours except blue. Blue Smarties were re-added in May 2010.\n\nRed Smarties were previously dyed with cochineal, a derivative of the product made by extracting colour from female cochineal beetles. A pigment extracted from red cabbage is now used in the United Kingdom.\n\nFor the purposes of assessing an \"active learning approach to epidemiology and critical appraisal\" a mock randomised controlled trial tested the hypothesis that red Smarties could increase happiness. Based on a trial with 117 participants in four settings in Australia, Canada and Malaysia, red Smarties eaters were no happier than yellow Smarties eaters. \n\nSmarties are also sold in the form of chocolate bars and eggs with fragments of Smarties in them, and chocolate-and-vanilla ice cream with Smarties pieces in it known as Smarties Fusion. A variant on Smarties ice cream is the Smarties McFlurry, sold by McDonald's. It was discontinued temporarily in 2012, brought back in early 2014 but withdrawn again in late 2015, being replaced with Oreo. For decades Canadian Dairy Queen restaurants offered a Smarties Blizzard, however, in early 2015 this was dropped and replaced with an M%26M's Blizzard. The Smarties blizzard returned to the menu in early 2018.\n\nIn 1997, larger-sized Giant Smarties were introduced, and, in 2004, Fruity Smarties. Another variation of Smarties, which contained white chocolate rather than milk chocolate, was also introduced. These were trialled as \"Smarctic Frost Bites\", however upon their proper release a year or so later, they were simply called White Chocolate Smarties.\n\nIn 1998, a product known as \"Smarties Secrets\" was introduced which contained sweets of varying designs, colours and flavours. The packaging also contained a small comic book. This product is no longer available.\n\nIn Canada, there was a limited line of red and white Smarties where the white Smarties sport a red maple leaf, reminiscent of the Canadian flag. Holiday packaging for Halloween (sold as Scaries), Christmas and Valentine's Day (containing only pink and red Smarties) is common. Also in Canada, Nestlé has introduced Peanut and Peanut Butter Smarties.\n\nAround Christmas, Nestlé Australia and Canada often releases Smarties in the Christmas colours of red, green and white.\n\nIn other countries, like Canada, there is more variety in packaging. Smarties can be purchased in rectangular boxes, a giant tube, or in a stand-up plastic bag, and in 410 g bags in Australia and New Zealand.\n\nIn the United States a Smarties variant was introduced by Nestlé for a limited time as part of a product promotion for Disney's animation feature \"Tarzan\" in 1999. \"Tarzan Treats\" featured red, green, brown, blue, orange and yellow Smarties pieces. Yellow pieces contained an outline graphic of characters featured in the film. This Smarties variant was made in Canada for distribution in the United States.\n\nThe current Smarties slogan is \"Only Smarties have the answer\", which has been used since the late 1970s; however, the previous slogan, \"Do you eat the red ones last?\", is still occasionally used.\n\nIn the 1950s and 1960s, the phrase \"Buy some for Lulu\" was sung as a tagline in commercials. In the end of the commercial, a boy/girl (usually a teacher or cowboy etc.) says the phrase and walks off, leaving the Rowntree text and the Smartie packaging on the screen for five seconds. This was before the rise of the singer Lulu.\n\nThere was also a song called \"A Handful of Smarties,\" written by Gerald Masters, which also aired in Europe, The Caribbean and Jamaica.\n\nMid-1980s television commercials were notable for their advanced use of computer-generated imagery, produced by Martin Lambie-Nairn.\n\nThe words for the Canadian advertising jingle from the 1970s until the mid-1990s were \"When you eat your Smarties, do you eat the red ones last? Do you suck them very slowly, or crunch them very fast? Eat those candy-coated chocolates, but tell me when I ask, when you eat your Smarties, do you eat the red ones last?\". This jingle was set to the tune of Lonnie Donegan's \"Does Your Chewing Gum Lose Its Flavour (On the Bedpost Overnight?)\".\n\nThe 2008 advertising campaign showed various people singing \"Everyday People\" by Sly and the Family Stone.\n\n, the slogan is \"Show 'your' colours!\" However, the redesigned 2015 box seems to have reverted to the original \"Do you eat the red ones last?\" slogan.\n\nThe German Smarties slogan is \"Viele, viele bunte Smarties\" (which translates as \"lots and lots of colourful Smarties\").\n\nIn South Africa the slogan is \"Wot a lot I got\". This is often printed on one of the sides of the Smarties box in brown lettering simply as a single word, \"Wotalotigot\".\n\n\n"}
{"id": "704562", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=704562", "title": "Waterzooi", "text": "Waterzooi\n\nWaterzooi is a stew dish from Belgium and originating in Flanders . The second part of the name derives from the Middle Dutch terms \"sode\", \"zo(o)de\" and \"soot\", words referring to the act of boiling or the ingredients being boiled. It is sometimes called \"Gentse Waterzooi\" which refers to the Belgian town of Ghent where it originated. The original dish is often made of fish, either freshwater or sea, (known as \"Viszooitje\"), though today chicken waterzooi (\"Kippenwaterzooi\") is more common. The most accepted theory is that rivers around Ghent became too polluted and the fish there disappeared. Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor ate the rich dish, even after suffering from gout.\n\nAll versions are based on a soup-base of egg yolk, cream and thickened vegetable broth. The stew itself contains fish or chicken, vegetables including carrots, onions, celeriac, leeks, potatoes and herbs such as parsley, thyme, bay-leaves and sage.\n\nOriginally, burbot was used but this fish had all but disappeared from the rivers until its recent return due to conservation efforts. Nowadays, fish such as eel, pike, carp and bass are used, though other fish such as cod, monkfish, or halibut can be used. \"Gentse Waterzooi van Tarbot\" includes turbot.\n\nChicken is a popular alternative to fish in the recipe, though the rest of the ingredients remain the same.\n\n"}
{"id": "704765", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=704765", "title": "Alfajor", "text": "Alfajor\n\nAn alfajor or alajú (, plural \"alfajores\") is a traditional confection found in Argentina, Uruguay, El Salvador, Peru, Bolivia, Southern France, Ecuador, Andorra, Spain, Paraguay, Venezuela, Southern Brazil and the Philippines. The archetypal \"alfajor\" entered Iberia during the period of al-Andalus. It is produced in the form of a small cylinder and is sold either individually or in boxes containing several pieces.\n\nIn Spain, there are a variety of different recipes for preparing \"alfajores\", but the most traditional contain flour, honey, almonds and several spices, such as cinnamon. \"Alfajores\" are most commonly sold around Christmas, but in Medina Sidonia, they are available year-round. The traditional Spanish \"alfajor\" has been produced in this town (where it is called an \"alajú\") since ancient times, and the recipe has been traditionally handed down from father to son.\n\n\"Alfajores\" are still made by craftsmen in Medina Sidonia using natural ingredients that include honey, almonds, hazelnuts, sugar, flour, and breadcrumbs, and mixed with natural spices. The manufacturing process has been respected following a recipe found by Mariano Pardo de Figueroa in 1786. In Medina Sidonia, the annual production of approximately 45,000 kilograms is mostly consumed in the province of Cadiz, but they are also famous in Sevilla, Malaga and Huelva.\n\nOn 15 September 2004, protected geographical indication was ratified by the \"Consejo de agricultura y pesca de la junta de Andalucia\" and published in the \"Official Journal of the European Union\" as \"Alfajor de Medina Sidonia\" on 6 March 2007.\n\nIn the province of Cuenca, Spain, where the \"alfajor\" is called \"alajú\" it is made with almond, honey and figs, all wrapped in a wafer.\nMedina Sidonia was the capital for the Arabic world of confection, where the \"alfajor\" has centuries of history with a recipe that has been transmitted from generation to generation. In this town, there is an account of Mariano Pardo de Figueroa, a gastronomist better known by his pseudonym Doctor Thebussem, who documented the history of this sweet, wherein he wrote that on 2 July 1487, Enrique de Guzmán, second count of Medina Sidonia, ordered the council and majors of the region to send to Malaga 50 cows, 50 oxen, 200 calves and provision of \"alajú\" from his city.\n\nThe recipe documented by the accounts of Thebussem in the 19th century is defined as the following:\n\nIn South America \"alfajores\" are found most notably in Argentina, Uruguay, Ecuador, Paraguay, Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Peru, Venezuela, and Brazil. Alfajores have been popular in Argentina and Uruguay since the mid-19th century. However, these differ from the Spanish alfajores in that they are made with two round cookies with different sweet fillings between them. The filling is usually dulce de leche, although there are a lot of variations. They can be covered with powder sugar (the traditional ones), glazed sugar (Santafesinos or \"de nieve\"), grated coconut or chocolate. Argentina is today the world largest consumer of alfajores, both in total numbers and in per capita calculations, being the most common snack for schoolchildren and adults.. Alfajores are also very popular in Peru, especially the artisanal types.\n\nSome of the best known alfajor brands in South America are the Argentine \"Jorgito\", \"Suchard\", \"Havanna\", \"Cachafaz\", the Uruguayan \"Punta Ballena\", \"Sierra de Minas\", \"Alfajores Portezuelo\" and Peruvian \"Casa del Alfajor\".\n\nIn Puerto Rico, they underwent creolization, lost their almond and gained ground cassava. They can take varying amounts of sugar and spices. It's possible that Puerto Rico's most common version of this dessert (South American version with dulce de leche) reached Puerto Rico from Venezuela, but the opposite is also possible. Depending on region some add cornstarch, citrus zest, ginger and honey, filled with chocolate, vanilla cream, dulce de leche, fruit paste, or coconut. The filling can be mixed with almonds, sesame seeds, coconut flakes, or sprinkles.\n\nAccording to Spanish philologist and dialectologist Manuel Alvar López, \"alfajor\" is an Andalusian variant of the Castilian \"alajú\", derived from the Arabic word الفاخر, \"al- fakher\", meaning luxurious, and, contrary to some beliefs that it originated in the new world, was introduced to Latin America as \"alfajor\". The word had been introduced into Spanish dictionaries in the 14th century.\n\nThe publication of historical dictionaries of the Spanish language allows one to document both forms of the original \"alajur\", written as \"alajú\" and \"alfajor\". \"Alajur\" and multiple geographic variations are sweets made of a paste of almonds, nuts, breadcrumbs and honey. It is possible that \"alfajor\" and \"alajú\" were Arabisms introduced into the Spanish language in different places and times, and, supposing both came from the same etymology, from a linguistic point of view, \"alajú\" is probably an Arabism of Castillian Spanish, and so it is still alive in Cuenca, Toledo, Guadalajara and in \"la Sierra de la peña de Francia\"; meanwhile the variation \"alfajor\" is Andalusian and Murcian. In the Americas, the word \"alfajor\" was not known until the 19th century.\n\nIn 712, the Arab general Musa ibn Nusair arrived in Algeciras with an army of 18,000 soldiers to undertake the conquest of Medina Sidonia, Alcalá de Guadaira and Carmona. A similar sweet called \"alaú\" is found in the Arabic-Hispanic cookbook Kitab al-Tabikh, by an anonymous author. The Spanish grammarian Nebrija appointed the word for the first time in his Latin-Spanish Dictionary (1492) as: \"alfaxor\" or \"alaxur\". In the 12th century, Raimundo Martin describes in his book \"Vocabulista\" another possible etymology of the Hispano-Arabic \"fasur\", meaning \"nectar\".\n\nThe regulations allow the use of only pure honey, almonds, nuts, breadcrumbs, sugar, flour and spices, such as aniseed, sesame, cilantro, cloves and cinnamon. The Protected Geographical Indication \"alfajores\" are meant to be presented in a cylindrical shape, with a minimum weight of 30 grams each, and with a minimum size of about 18 cm in length and a diameter of 1,5 cm. Each of them will be protected with a wrapping paper, and the ends made an ornament in a spiral shape with a ribbon out of the same paper. Once individually wrapped, they may be packaged in wood or cardboard boxes, but never in plastic.\n\nTraditional \"alfajores\" in Argentina, Peru, and Uruguay consist of two round, sweet biscuits made of wheat flour or corn starch joined together with dulce de leche (known as \"manjar blanco\" in Peru), and optionally coated with powdered sugar. More modern \"industrial\" varieties in Chile, Uruguay and Argentina, are coated with dark or white chocolate (many \"alfajores\" are sold in \"black\" and \"white\" versions), or simply covered with powdered sugar. These are also known as a \"Chilean Oreo\". One variation is called \"\"alfajor de nieve\"\" (snow alfajor) and has a white coating consisting of a mixture of egg whites and sugar. Most \"alfajores\" come packaged in aluminium foil. Alfajores are made in various diameters and are consumed as snacks.\n\nIn Mexico, \"alfajores\" are made with just coconut, and are normally a tri-color coconut confection. In Nicaragua, they are similar to the Canary island type of \"alfajores\" and are made with molasses and different grains including corn and cacao. They are often packaged in plastic wrap or wax paper.\n\nThe Brazilian style of alfajor is commonly known as \"bem-casado\" (literally \"well wed\"), also filled with \"doce de leite\" and covered with thin sugar. There is also another candy known as \"pão de mel\" (meaning \"honey bread\" in Portuguese) that shares some features with alfajor, but more closely resembles a gingerbread. This variety is also coated with dark chocolate - like in Argentina, Uruguay and Chile - but has a cake-like texture on the inside and can be filled with doce de leite, chocolate and coconut cream.\n\nOther varieties include different elements in the preparation of the biscuits, such as peanuts, and a variety of fillings, coatings, or even the addition of a third biscuit (\"alfajor triple\").\n\nAccording to Guinness World Records, the biggest \"alfajor\" in the world, measuring almost two meters in diameter and 80 centimeters in height and weighing 464 kilograms, was made on 11 December 2010 in Minas, Lavalleja Department, Uruguay. The giant \"alfajor\" was made to mark the celebration of Uruguay's first National Alfajor Festival. More than 30 people participated in the preparation of the record-breaking \"alfajor\".\n\n"}
{"id": "704826", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=704826", "title": "Dulce de leche", "text": "Dulce de leche\n\nDulce de leche (; ) is a confection prepared by slowly heating sweetened milk to create a substance that derives its flavour from the Maillard reaction, also changing colour, with an appearance and flavour similar to caramel. \"Dulce de leche\" is Spanish for \"candy [made] of milk\" or \"caramel\" . In Chile dulce de leche is known as \"manjar de leche\" or just \"manjar\". . It is very popular in many South American countries.\n\nThe most basic recipe calls for slowly simmering milk and sugar, stirring almost constantly, although other ingredients such as vanilla may be added for flavour. Much of the water in the milk evaporates and the mix thickens; the resulting \"dulce de leche\" is usually about a sixth of the volume of the milk used. The transformation that occurs in preparation is caused by a combination of two common browning reactions called caramelization and the Maillard reaction.\nA homemade form of \"dulce de leche\" sometimes is made by boiling an unopened can of sweetened condensed milk for two to three hours (or 30 to 45 minutes in a pressure cooker), particularly by those living in countries where it cannot be bought ready-made. This results in a product that is much sweeter than the slow-boiled kind. It is dangerous to do this on a stove: if the pot is allowed to boil dry, the can will overheat and explode.\n\n\"Dulce de leche\" is used to flavour candies or other sweet foods, such as cakes, churros, cookies (see \"alfajor\"), waffles, \"crème caramel\" (known as \"flan\" in Spanish- and Portuguese-speaking regions), and ice creams; it provides the \"toffee\" part of English Banoffee pie and is also a popular spread on crepes (panqueques) and toast, while the French \"confiture de lait\" is commonly served with \"fromage blanc\".\n\nA solid candy made from \"dulce de leche\", similar to the Polish \"krówka\" and named Vaquita (\"little cow\"), was manufactured by the Mu-Mu factory in Argentina until the company went out of business in 1984. Subsequently, other brands began to manufacture similar candies, giving them names such as \"Vauquita\" and \"Vaquerita\" in an effort to link their products to the original.\n\nIn the Midwestern United States in the 1950s a version of \"dulce de leche\" called \"sticky dessert\" used Carnation sweetened condensed milk.\n\nIn Israel and the United States and several other countries it is often used as a filling for the traditional ball-shaped doughnuts popular around the Jewish holiday of Hannukah.\n"}
{"id": "705203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=705203", "title": "Wayang", "text": "Wayang\n\nWayang, also known as Wajang, is a form of puppet theatre art found in Indonesia and other parts of Southeast Asia, wherein a dramatic story is told through shadows thrown by puppets and sometimes combined with human characters. The art form celebrates the Indonesian culture and artistic talent; its origins are traced to the spread of Hinduism in the medieval era and the arrival of leather-based puppet arts called \"Tholu bommalata\" from southern India.\n\nWayang refers to the entire dramatic show. Sometimes the leather puppet itself is referred to as \"wayang\". Performances of shadow puppet theatre are accompanied by a \"gamelan\" orchestra in Java, and by \"gender wayang\" in Bali. The dramatic stories depict mythologies, such as episodes from the Hindu epics the \"Ramayana\", the \"Mahabharata\" as well as local adaptations of cultural legends. Traditionally, a wayang is played out in a ritualized midnight-to-dawn show by a \"dalang\", an artist and spiritual leader; people watch the show from both sides of the screen.\n\nUNESCO designated \"wayang kulit\", a shadow puppet theatre and the best known of the Indonesian wayang, as a Masterpiece of Oral and Intangible Heritage of Humanity on 7 November 2003. In return for the acknowledgment, UNESCO required Indonesians to preserve their heritage. Wayang has also been a significant historical art form in Malaysia, Thailand, Cambodia and Laos.\n\nThe term 'wayang' is the Javanese word for shadow, or \"bayang\" in standard Indonesian; the word also means \"imagination\". In modern daily Javanese and Indonesian vocabulary, \"wayang\" can refer to the puppet itself or the whole puppet theatre performance.\n\nWayang is the traditional shadow puppet theatre in Indonesia and other southeast Asian countries. There is no evidence that wayang existed in ancient Indonesia. The earliest evidence is from the late 1st millennium CE, in medieval-era texts and archeological sites. The origins of Wayang are unclear, and three competing theories have been proposed:\n\n\nRegardless of its origins, states Brandon, Wayang developed and matured into a Javanese phenomenon. There is no true contemporary puppet shadow artwork in either China or India that has the sophistication, depth and creativity as expressed in Wayang.\n\nThe oldest known record that probably concerns wayang is from the 9th century. Around 860 CE an Old Javanese (Kawi) charter issued by Maharaja Sri Lokapala mentions three sorts of performers: atapukan, aringgit, and abanol. Ringgit is described in an 11th-century Javanese poem as a leather shadow figure. An inscription dated 930 CE says \"si Galigi mawayang\" (\"Sir Galigi played wayang\"). From that time till today it seems certain features of traditional puppet theatre have remained. Galigi was an itinerant performer who was requested to perform for a special royal occasion. At that event he performed a story about the hero Bhima from the Mahabharata. The kakawin \"Arjunawiwaha\" composed by Mpu Kanwa, the poet of Airlangga's court of Kahuripan kingdom, in 1035 CE describes \"santoṣâhĕlĕtan kĕlir sira sakêng sang hyang Jagatkāraṇa\", which means \"He is steadfast and just a \"wayang\" screen away from the 'Mover of the World'.\" \"Kelir\" is Javanese word for wayang screen, the verse eloquently comparing actual life to a wayang performance where the almighty \"Jagatkāraṇa\" (the mover of the world) as the ultimate \"dalang\" (puppet master) is just a thin screen away from us mortals. This reference to wayang as shadow plays suggested that wayang performance is already familiar in Airlangga's court and wayang tradition has been established in Java, perhaps earlier. An inscription from this period also mentioned some occupations as \"awayang\" and \"aringgit\".\n\nWayang kulit is a unique form of theatre employing light and shadow. The puppets are crafted from buffalo hide and mounted on bamboo sticks. When held up behind a piece of white cloth, with an electric bulb or an oil lamp as the light source, shadows are cast on the screen. The plays are typically based on romantic tales and religious legends, especially adaptations of the classic Indian epics, the Mahabharata and the Ramayana. Some of the plays are also based on local happening or other local secular stories.\n\nThe \"dalang\", sometimes referred to as \"Dhalang\" or \"Kawi Dalang\", is the puppeteer artist behind the entire performance. It is he who sits behind the screen, sings and narrates the dialogues of different characters of the story. With a traditional orchestra in the background to provide a resonant melody and its conventional rhythm, the dalang modulates his voice to create suspense thus heightening the drama. Invariably, the play climaxes with the triumph of good over evil. The \"dalang\" is highly respected in Indonesian culture for his knowledge, art and as a spiritual person capable of bringing to life the spiritual stories in the religious epics.\n\nThe figures of the wayang are also present in the paintings of that time, for example, the roof murals of the courtroom in Klungkung, Bali. They are still present in traditional Balinese painting today. The figures are painted, flat woodcarvings (a maximum of 5 to 15 mm thick—barely half an inch) with movable arms. The head is solidly attached to the body. \"Wayang klitik\" can be used to perform puppet plays either during the day or at night. This type of wayang is relatively rare.\n\nWayang today is both the most ancient and most popular form of puppet theatre in the world. Hundreds of people will stay up all night long to watch the superstar performers, dalang, who command extravagant fees and are international celebrities. Some of the most famous dalang in recent history are Ki Nartosabdho, Ki Anom Suroto, Ki Asep Sunandar Sunarya, Ki Sugino, and Ki Manteb Sudarsono.\n\nWayang kulit, or shadow puppets, are without a doubt the best known of the Indonesian wayang. Kulit means skin, and refers to the leather construction of the puppets that are carefully chiselled with very fine tools, supported with carefully shaped buffalo horn handles and control rods, and painted in beautiful hues, including gold. The stories are usually drawn from the Hindu epics the Ramayana and the Mahabharata.\n\nThere is a family of characters in Javanese wayang called \"Punakawan\"; they are sometimes referred to as \"clown-servants\" because they normally are associated with the story's hero, and provide humorous and philosophical interludes. Semar is actually the god of love, who has consented to live on earth to help humans. He has three sons: Gareng (oldest ), Petruk, and Bagong (youngest son). These characters did not originate in the Hindu epics, but were added later. They provide something akin to a political cabaret, dealing with gossip and contemporary affairs.\n\nThe puppet figures themselves vary from place to place. In Central Java the city of Surakarta (Solo) and city of Yogyakarta have the most well-known wayang traditions, and the most commonly imitated style of puppets. Regional styles of shadow puppets can also be found in Temanggung, West Java, Banyumas, Cirebon, Semarang, and East Java. Bali wayang are more compact and naturalistic figures, and Lombok has figures representing real people. Often modern-world objects as bicycles, automobiles, airplanes and ships will be added for comic effect, but for the most part the traditional puppet designs have changed little in the last 300 years.\n\nHistorically, the performance consisted of shadows cast by an oil lamp onto a cotton screen. Today, the source of light used in wayang performance in Java is most often a halogen electric light, while Bali still uses the traditional firelight. Some modern forms of wayang such as Wayang Sandosa (from BahaSA iNDOneSiA, since it uses the national language of Indonesian instead of Javanese) created in the Art Academy at Surakarta (STSI) employs theatrical spotlights, colored lights, contemporary music, and other innovations.\n\nMaking a wayang kulit figure that is suitable for a performance involves hand work that takes several weeks, with the artists working together in groups. They start from master models (typically on paper) which are traced out onto skin or parchment, providing the figures with an outline and with indications of any holes that will need to be cut (such as for the mouth or eyes). The figures are then smoothed, usually with a glass bottle, and primed. The structure is inspected and eventually the details are worked through. A further smoothing follows before individual painting, which is undertaken by yet another craftsman. Finally, the movable parts (upper arms, lower arms with hands and the associated sticks for manipulation) mounted on the body, which has a central staff by which it is held. A crew makes up to ten figures at a time, typically completing that number over the course of a week. However, unfortunately there is not strong continuing demand for the top skills of wayang craftspersons and the relatively few experts still skilled at the art sometimes find it difficult to earn a satisfactory income.\n\nThe painting of less expensive puppets is handled expediently with a spray technique, using templates, and with a different person handling each color. Less expensive puppets, often sold to children during performances, are sometimes made on cardboard instead of leather.\n\n\"Wayang wong\", also known as \"Wayang orang\" (literally \"human wayang\"), is a type of Javanese theatrical performance wherein human characters imitate movements of a puppet show. The show also integrates dance by the human characters into the dramatic performance. It typically shows episodes of the Ramayana or the Mahabharata.\n\n\"Wayang gedog\" theatrical performance take themes from the Panji cycles stories from the kingdom of Janggala. The players wear masks known as \"wayang topeng\" or \"wayang gedog\". The word \"gedog\" comes from \"kedok\", which, like \"topeng\" means \"mask\".\n\nThe main story of the performances is of Raden Panji and Candra, a love story about princess Candra Kirana of Kediri and Raden Panji Asmarabangun, the crown prince of Jenggala. Candra Kirana was the incarnation of Dewi Ratih (goddess of love) and Panji was an incarnation of Kamajaya (god of love). Kirana's story was given the title \"Smaradahana\" (\"The fire of love\"). At the end of the complicated story they finally can marry and bring forth a son, named Raja Putra. Panji Asmarabangun ruled Jenggala under the official names Sri Kameswara, Prabu Suryowiseso, and Hino Kertapati. Originally, wayang wong was performed only as an aristocratic entertainment in four palaces of Yogyakarta and Surakarta. In the course of time, it spread to become a popular and folk form as well.\n\nWayang golek are three-dimensional wooden rod puppets that are operated from below a wooden rod that runs through the body to the head, and by sticks connected to the hands. The construction of the puppets contributes to their versatility, expressiveness and aptitude for imitating human dance. Today, wayang golek is mainly associated with Sundanese culture of West Java. In Central Java, the wooden wayang also known as \"Wayang Menak\", which originated from Kudus, Central Java.\n\nLittle is known for certain about the history of wayang golek, but scholars have speculated that it most likely originated in China and arrived in Java sometime in the 17th century. Some of the oldest traditions of wayang golek are from the north coast of Java in what is called the pasisir region. This is home to some of the oldest Muslim kingdoms in Java and it is likely the wayang golek grew in popularity through telling the wayang menak stories of Amir Hamza, the uncle of Muhammad. These stories are still widely performed in Kabumen, Tegal, and Jepara as wayang golek menak, and in Cirebon, wayang golek cepak. Legendary origins of wayang golek attribute their invention to the Muslim saint Wali Sunan Kudus, who used the medium to proselytize Muslim values.\n\nIn the 18th century the tradition moved into the mountainous region of Priangan West Java where it eventually was used to tell stories of the Ramayana and the Mahabharata in a tradition now called Wayang Golek Purwa, which can be found in Bandung, Bogor and Jakarta. The adoption of Javanese Mataram kejawen culture by Sundanese aristocrats was probably the remnant of Mataram influence over the Priangan region during the reign of expansive Sultan Agung. While main characters from Ramayana and Mahabharata are similar with wayang kulit purwa version of Central Java, some of punakawan (servant also jester) were rendered in Sundanese names and characteristics, such as Cepot or Astrajingga as Bagong, Dawala or Udel as Petruk. Wayang golek purwa has become the most popular form of wayang golek today and the most famous puppeteer family is the Sunarya family which has produced several generations of stellar performers.\n\"Wayang klitik\" figures occupy a middle ground between the figures of wayang golek and wayang kulit. They are constructed similarly to wayang kulit figures, but from thin pieces of wood instead of leather, and, like wayang kulit figures, are used as shadow puppets. A further similarity is that they are the same smaller size as wayang kulit figures. However, wood is more subject to breakage than leather. During battle scenes, wayang klitik figures often sustain considerable damage, much to the amusement of the public, but in a country in which before 1970 there were no adequate glues available, breakage generally meant an expensive, newly made figure. On this basis the wayang klitik figures, which are to appear in plays where they have to endure battle scenes, have leather arms. The name of these figures is onomotopaeic, from the sound \"klitik-klitik\", that these figures make when worked by the dalang.\n\nWayang klitik figures come originally from eastern Java, where one still finds workshops turning them out. They are less costly to produce than wayang kulit figures.\n\nThe origin of the stories involved in these puppet plays comes from the kingdoms of eastern Java: Jenggala, Kediri and Majapahit. From Jenggala and Kediri come the stories of Raden Panji and Cindelaras, which tells of the adventures of a pair of village youngsters with their fighting cocks. The \"Damarwulan\" presents the stories of a hero from Majapahit. Damarwulan is a clever chap, who with courage, aptitude, intelligence and the assistance of his young lover \"Anjasmara\", makes a surprise attack on the neighboring kingdom and brings down Minakjinggo, an \"Adipati\" (viceroy) of Blambangan and mighty enemy of Majapahit's beautiful queen Sri Ratu Kencanawungu. As a reward, Damarwulan is married to Kencanawungu and becomes king of Majapahit; he also takes Lady Anjasmara as a second wife. This story is full of love affairs and battles and is very popular with the public. The dalang is liable to incorporate the latest local gossip and quarrels and work them into the play as comedy.\n\n\"Wayang beber\" relies on scroll-painted presentations of the stories being told. Wayang beber has strong similarities to narratives in the form of illustrated ballads that were common at annual fairs in medieval and early modern Europe. They have also been subject to the same fate—they have nearly vanished although there are still some groups of artists who support wayang beber in places such as Surakarta (Solo) in Central Java.\n\nChinese visitors to Java during the 15th century described a storyteller or unrolled scrolls and told stories that made the audience laugh or cry. A few scrolls of images remain from those times, found today in museums. There are two sets, hand-painted on hand-made bark cloth, that are still owned by families who have inherited them from many generations ago, in Pacitan and Wonogiri, both villages in Central Java. Performances, mostly in small open-sided pavilions or auditoriums, take place according to the following pattern:\n\nThe dalang gives a sign, the small gamelan orchestra with drummer and a few knobbed gongs and a musician with a rebab (violin-like instrument held vertically) begins to play and the dalang unrolls the first scroll of the story. Then, speaking and singing, he narrates the episode in more detail. In this manner, in the course of the evening he unrolls several scrolls one at a time. Each scene in the scrolls represents a story or part of a story. The content of the story typically stems from the Panji romances which are semi-historical legends set in the 12th-13th century East Javanese kingdoms of Jenggala, Daha and Kediri, and also in Bali.\n\nAccording to Marzanna Paplawska, the historically popular \"Wayang kulit\" typically is based on the Hindu epics the \"Mahabharata\" and the \"Ramayana\". In 1960s, the Christian missionary effort adopted the art form to create \"Wayang wahyu\". The Javanese Jesuit Brother Timotheus L. Wignyosubroto used the show to communicate to the Javanese and other Indonesians the teachings of the Bible and of the Catholic Church in a manner accessible to the audience. Similarly, \"Wayang sadat\" has deployed Wayang for religious teachings of Islam, while \"Wayang pancasila\" has used it as a medium for national politics.\n\nWayang characters are derived from several group of stories and settings. The most popular and the most ancient is \"wayang purwa\" which its story and characters was derived from Indian Hindu epics of Ramayana and Mahabharata, set in ancient kingdoms of Hastinapura, Ayodhya and Alengkapura (Lanka). Another group of characters derived from Panji cycles, natively developed in Java during Kediri Kingdom, the story set in twin Javanese kingdoms of Janggala and Panjalu (Kediri).\n\nWayang Purwa (Javanese for \"ancient\" or \"original\" wayang) refer to wayang that based on the stories of Hindu epics Ramayana and Mahabharata. Its form of expression usually performed as \"wayang kulit\", \"wayang golek\", and \"wayang wong\" dance drama.\n\nIn Central Java, popular wayang kulit characters include the following (Notopertomo & Jatirahayu 2001).\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\nDerived from Panji cycles, natively developed in Java during Kediri Kingdom, the story set in twin Javanese kingdoms of Janggala and Panjalu (Kediri). Its form of expressions are usually performed as \"wayang gedog\" (masked wayang) and \"wayang wong\" dance drama of Java and Bali.\n\nDerived from Javanese-Islamic literature \"Serat Menak\" which is a Javanese rendering of Malay Hikayat Amir Hamzah, which ultimately derived from Persian Hamzanama, tell the adventure of Amir Hamzah, the uncle of prophet Muhammad. The wooden wayang Menak is similar in shape to Wayang Golek, it is most prevalent in northern coast of Central Java, especially Kudus area.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "707704", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=707704", "title": "Fondue", "text": "Fondue\n\nFondue (, , ) is a Swiss melted cheese served in a communal pot (\"caquelon\" or fondue pot) over a portable stove (\"réchaud\") heated with a candle or spirit lamp, and eaten by dipping bread into the cheese using long-stemmed forks. It was promoted as a Swiss national dish by the Swiss Cheese Union (Schweizerische Käseunion) in the 1930s, and was popularized in North America in the 1960s.\n\nSince the 1950s, the term \"fondue\" has been generalized to other dishes in which a food is dipped into a communal pot of liquid kept hot in a fondue pot: chocolate fondue, in which pieces of fruit or pastry are dipped into a melted chocolate mixture, and \"fondue bourguignonne\", in which pieces of meat are cooked in hot oil or broth.\n\nThe word \"fondue\" is the feminine passive past participle of the French verb \"fondre\" (\"to melt\") used as a noun. It is first attested in French in 1735, in Vincent la Chapelle's \"Cuisinier moderne\", and in English in 1878.\n\nThe earliest known recipe for cheese fondue as we know it today comes from a 1699 book published in Zurich, under the name \"Käss mit Wein zu kochen\", \"to cook cheese with wine\". It calls for grated or cut-up cheese to be melted with wine, and for bread to be dipped in it.\n\nHowever, the \"name\" \"cheese fondue\", until the late nineteenth century, referred to a preparation including eggs and cheese, as in la Chapelle's 1735 \"Fonduë de Fromage, aux Truffes Fraiches\" it was something between scrambled eggs with cheese and a cheese soufflé. Brillat-Savarin wrote in 1834 that it is \"nothing other than scrambled eggs with cheese\". Variations included cream (\"à la genevoise\") and truffles (\"à la piémontaise\") in addition to eggs, as well as what is now called \"raclette\" (\"fondue valaisanne\").\n\nThe first known recipe for the modern cheese fondue under that name, with cheese and wine but no eggs, was published in 1875, and was already presented as a Swiss national dish. Despite its modern associations with rustic mountain life, it was a town-dweller's dish from the lowlands of western, French-speaking, Switzerland: rich cheese like Gruyère was a valuable export item which peasants could not afford to eat.\n\nThe introduction of cornstarch (\"Maïzena\") to Switzerland in 1905 made it easier to make a smooth and stable emulsion of the wine and cheese, and probably contributed to the success of fondue.\n\nFondue was popularized as a Swiss national dish by the Swiss Cheese Union (Schweizerische Käseunion) in the 1930s as a way of increasing cheese consumption. The Swiss Cheese Union also created pseudo-regional recipes as part of the \"spiritual defence of Switzerland\". After World War II rationing ended, the Swiss Cheese Union continued its marketing campaign, sending fondue sets to military regiments and event organizers across Switzerland. Fondue is now a symbol of Swiss unity.\n\nIn the meantime, fondue continued to be promoted aggressively in Switzerland, with slogans like \"La fondue crée la bonne humeur\" 'fondue creates a good mood' and (1981, in Swiss German) \"Fondue isch guet und git e gueti Luune\" 'fondue is good and creates a good mood' – abbreviated as \"figugegl\".\n\nFondue was promoted to Americans at the Swiss Pavilion's Alpine restaurant at the 1964 New York World's Fair.\n\nThe extension of the name \"fondue\" to other dishes served in a communal hot pot dates to 1950s New York. Konrad Egli, a Swiss restaurateur, introduced \"fondue bourguignonne\" at his Chalet Suisse restaurant in 1956. In the mid 1960s, he invented chocolate fondue as part of a promotion for Toblerone chocolate. A sort of chocolate mousse or chocolate cake had also sometimes been called \"chocolate fondue\" starting in the 1930s.\n\nCheese fondue consists of a blend of cheeses, wine and seasoning. To prepare the \"caquelon\" it is first rubbed with a cut garlic clove. White wine is slightly heated with cornstarch, and then grated cheese is added and stirred until melted. It is often topped off with a bit of kirsch. The cornstarch or other starch is added to prevent separation. The mixture is stirred continuously as it heats in the \"caquelon\".\n\nWhen it is ready, diners dip cubes of bread speared on a fondue fork into the mixture.\n\nA cheese fondue mixture should be kept warm enough to keep the fondue smooth and liquid but not so hot that it burns. If this temperature is held until the fondue is finished there will be a thin crust of toasted (not burnt) cheese at the bottom of the \"caquelon\". This is called \"la religieuse\" (French for \"the nun\"). It has the texture of a cracker and is almost always lifted out and eaten.\n\n\n\n\nRefrigerated fondue blends are sold in most Swiss supermarkets as convenience food and need little more than melting in the caquelon. Individual portions heatable in a microwave oven are also sold.\n\n\"Fondue chinoise\" (lit. \"Chinese fondue\") is a common name for hot pot, where meat and vegetables are cooked in a shared pot of broth, or just dip the sliced meat with fondue fork into boiling broth with salad as side dish. Various sauces are provided on the side. After all the diners have finished cooking, they eat the now well-flavored broth.\n\nSlices of fruit or pastry are dipped in a caquelon of melted chocolate, often flavored with rum or kirschwasser. Dessert fondues may also be made with coconut, honey, caramel, or marshmallow.\n\n\"Fondue bourguignonne\" consists of a fondue pot filled with hot oil into which diners dip pieces of meat to cook them. Various dipping sauces are provided on the side.\n\n\"Fondue vigneronne\" or \"Fondue Bacchus\" is like fondue bourguignonne, with wine rather than oil. Red wine fondue consists of red wine boiled, and seasoned with salt, pepper, garlic, onions and herbs; the white wine version is spiced with cinnamon, chilis, coriander, white pepper and enriched with chicken broth. The guests then dip meat, fish or vegetables in the caquelon and top them with bearnaise, tartare sauce or simply French mustard.\n\nConsists of a metallic or stone slab. Primarily for meat fondue, oil or olive oil is poured on the slab, and the meat is cooked over it like in a pan. It is a very common form of fondue in South America.\n\nA tradition says that if a man loses his bread in the pot, he buys drinks all around.\n\nFondue is eaten by spearing a piece of bread on a fork, swirling it in the pot, and putting it into the mouth. Some writers recommend that the dipping fork be used only to transport the food from the pot to one's plate, not to eat from.\n\nThe choice of beverage to drink with fondue is specified in several conflicting traditions; some demand that white wine should be drunk, while others specify black tea as the beverage of choice. Some people drink a shot of spirits during or after the meal. A study published in 2010 showed that none of these beverages caused indigestion after eating fondue.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "708598", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=708598", "title": "Blaa", "text": "Blaa\n\nA blaa , or Waterford Blaa, is a doughy, white bread bun (roll) speciality; particularly associated with Waterford, Ireland. It is currently made in Waterford and County Kilkenny and was historically made in Wexford. \n\nBlaas are sold in two varieties: \"soft\" and \"crusty\". Soft blaas are slightly sweet, malt flavour, light but firm in texture and melt in the mouth. Crusty blaas are crunchy at first bite, then chewy with a subtle malt taste and a pleasing bitter aftertaste from the well cooked, dark crust.\n\nBlaas quickly lose their freshness and are best consumed within a few hours of purchase.\n\nA combined 12,000 blaas are sold each day by the four remaining bakeries producing blaas: Walsh's Bakehouse, Kilmacow Bakery, Barron's Bakery & Coffee House and Hickey's Bakery. Of the four remaining bakeries, only two remain in Waterford City.\n\nEaten mainly at breakfast with butter, they are also eaten at other times of the day with a wide variety of fillings (including a type of luncheon meat often referred to as \"red lead\"). The \"breakfast blaa\" (egg, bacon rasher and sausage) is more common than the \"breakfast roll\" in Waterford.\n\nBlaas are sometimes confused with a similar bun known as a bap; however, blaas are square in shape, softer, and doughier, and are most notably identified by the white flour shaken over them before the baking process.\n\nSome sources report that the blaa was introduced to Waterford at the end of the 17th century by the Huguenots.\nThis theory is disputed because although white flour existed in the 17th century, it was not widely used until mass production of the industrial revolution.\n\nOn 19 November 2013, the Waterford blaa was awarded Protected Geographical Indication status by the European Commission.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "711032", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=711032", "title": "Takatāpui", "text": "Takatāpui\n\nTakatāpui (also spelled takataapui) is the Māori word meaning a devoted partner of the same sex. In modern terminology, a person who identifies as takatāpui is a Māori individual who is gay, lesbian, bisexual, or transgender (LGBT). \"Takatāpui\" is used nowadays in response to the Western construction of \"sexuality, gender, and corresponding identity expressions.\" (gender identity and sexual identity)., though Maori gender identifiers (wāhine, tāne) and gender roles (marae protocol, warfare), delineated male and female modes of dress and placement of Tā moko, existed prior to and outside of Western influence. The term encompasses not only aspects of sexuality but also cultural identity. \"Takatāpui\" incorporates both a sense of indigenous identity and communicates sexual orientation; it has become an umbrella term to build solidarity among sexuality and gender minorities within Māori communities.\n\n\"Takatāpui\" is not a new term, but the application of it is recent. The \"Dictionary of the Māori Language\"—first compiled by missionary Herbert Williams in 1832—notes the definition as \"intimate companion of the same sex\". After a long period of disuse there has been a resurgence since the 1980s for a label to describe an individual who is both Māori and non-heterosexual. The word \"takatāpui\" was found to have existed in pre-colonial New Zealand to describe relationships between people of the same sex. The existence of this word repudiates the conservative Māori argument that homosexuality did not exist in Māori society prior to the arrival of Europeans.\n\nThe classic and earliest full account of the origins of gods and the first human beings is contained in a manuscript entitled \"Nga Tama a Rangi\" (\"The Sons of Heaven\"), written in 1849 by Wī Maihi Te Rangikāheke, of the Ngāti Rangiwewehi tribe of Rotorua. The manuscript \"gives a clear and systematic account of Māori religious beliefs and beliefs about the origin of many natural phenomena, the creation of woman, the origin of death, and the fishing up of lands. No other version of this myth is presented in such a connected and systematic way, but all early accounts, from whatever area or tribe, confirm the general validity of the Rangikāheke version. It begins as follows: 'My friends, listen to me. The Māori people stem from only one source, namely the Great-heaven-which-stands-above, and the Earth-which-lies-below. According to Europeans, God made heaven and earth and all things. According to the Māori, Heaven (Rangi) and Earth (Papa) are themselves the source'\" (Biggs 1966:448).\n\nOne of the great love stories of the Māori world is the legend of Hinemoa and Tūtānekai. The story remains popular and is retold in songs, films, cultural theatre and dance. Hinemoa defies her family to claim Tūtānekai, her \"heart's desire\" - the love-child of a chief's wife who was not her social equal. In reading Te Rangikāheke's original version in Māori, Laurie found that Tūtānekai had a male friend, \"hoa takatāpui\", and Tūtānekai was \"nowhere near as impressed by Hinemoa as the romantic Victorian narrative had construed\". After Tūtānekai became united with Hinemoa, Tiki famously grieved for the loss of his \"hoa takatāpui\". Tūtānekai, feeling grieved as well, arranged that his younger sister marry Tiki to console him. While no-one can say Tūtānekai and Tiki were sexually involved, their relationship was accepted to be intimate beyond mere friendship, and the story illustrates the concept that \"takatāpui\" in traditional Māori life was not exactly the same as constructions of contemporary homosexuality in Western societies.\n\nOne of the first contemporary uses of \"takatāpui\" was in a report to the Public Health Commission by Herewini and Sheridan (1994), which used the term to encompass Māori gay men as well as men who have sex with men but who don't identify as gay. The historical usage of the term might not correspond with contemporary understanding of LGBT identities, while information on non-heterosexual sexuality and variations from gender roles as we understand them today has been substantially eradicated by Victorian morality brought by colonizers and Christian missionaries. Although circumstantial, there remains some evidence that takatāpui lived without discrimination in pre-European times. Some contemporary Māori LGBT people use the terms \"gay\" and \"lesbian\" as a convenience, while others self-identify as \"takatāpui\" to resist the colonization of their identities and bodies which would \"deny access to important ancestral knowledge\". Some use both terms depending on the context. Using \"takatāpui\" to self-identify requires acceptance of oneself as Māori as well as being LGBT. About one fifth of Māori are young people, but the state education system does not explicitly provide for exploring multiple identities. The traditional spiritual and social roles that \"takatāpui\" have played in historical Māori societies are not easily incorporated into teaching plans and despite a 2002 mandate from the Ministry of Education, there remains a \"wholesale absence of culturally appropriate sexuality curriculum in schools for the Māori.\"\n\nDerivatives of \"takatāpui\" include \"takatāpui kaharua\" for bisexual, \"takatāpui wahine\" for lesbian and \"takatāpui wahine ki tāne\" or \"takatāpui tāne ki wahine\" for trans men/trans man or trans women. \"Takatāpui\" serves as an umbrella term for all these identities.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "711987", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=711987", "title": "Risotto", "text": "Risotto\n\nRisotto (, , from meaning \"rice\") is a northern Italian rice dish cooked with broth until it reaches a creamy consistency. The broth can be derived from meat, fish, or vegetables. Many types of risotto contain butter, onion, white wine, and parmesan cheese. It is one of the most common ways of cooking rice in Italy. Saffron was originally used for flavour and its attractive yellow colour.\n\nRisotto in Italy is normally a first course, served on its own before the main course, but \"risotto alla milanese\", () is often served together with ossobuco alla milanese.\n\nRice has been grown in southern Italy since the 14th century, and eventually reached Milano in the northern region of Italy. While, according to a legend, a young glassblower's apprentice from Flanders, who used to use saffron as a pigment, added it to a rice dish at a wedding feast, the first recipe identifiable as risotto dates from 1809. It includes rice sautéed in butter, sausages, bone marrow, onions with hot broth with saffron gradually added. There is a recipe for a dish named as a risoto in the 1854 \"Trattato di cucina\" ('Treatise on Cooking') by Giovanni Vialardi, assistant chief chef to kings. However, the question of who invented the risotto in Milano remains unanswered today.\n\nThe rice varieties now \nassociated with risotto were developed in the 20th century, starting with Maratelli in 1914.\n\nA high-starch (amylopectin), low-amylose round medium- or short- grain white rice is usually used for making risotto. Such rices have the ability to absorb liquids and to release starch and so they are stickier than the long grain varieties. The principal varieties used in Italy are Arborio, Baldo, Carnaroli, Maratelli, Padano, Roma, and Vialone Nano. Carnaroli, Maratelli (historical Italian variety) and Vialone Nano are considered to be the best (and most expensive) varieties, with different users preferring one over another. They have slightly different properties. For example, Carnaroli is less likely than Vialone Nano to get overcooked, but the latter, being smaller, cooks faster and absorbs condiments better. Other varieties such as Roma, Baldo, Ribe and Originario may be used but will not have the creaminess of the traditional dish; these varieties are considered better for soups and other non-risotto rice dishes, and sweet rice desserts. Rice designations of superfino, semifino and fino refer to the size and shape (specifically the length and the narrowness) of the grains, and not the quality.\n\nThere are many different risotto recipes with different ingredients, but they are all based on rice of an appropriate variety, cooked in a standard procedure. Risotto, unlike other rice dishes, requires constant care and attention. The rice is not to be pre-rinsed, boiled, or drained, as washing would remove much of the starch required for a creamy texture.\n\nThe rice is first cooked briefly in a \"soffritto\" of onion and butter or olive oil, to coat each grain in a film of fat, called \"tostatura\"; white wine is added and must be absorbed by the grains. When it has been absorbed the heat is raised to medium high, and boiling stock is gradually added in small amounts, while stirring constantly. The constant stirring, with only a small amount of liquid present, forces the grains to rub against each other and release the starch molecules from the outside of the grains into the surrounding liquid, creating a smooth creamy-textured mass. When the rice is cooked the pot is taken off the heat for \"mantecatura\", vigorously beating in refrigerated balls of grated parmesan cheese and butter, to make the texture as creamy and smooth as possible. It may be removed from the heat a few minutes earlier and left to cook with its residual heat.\n\nProperly cooked risotto is rich and creamy even if no cream is added, due to the starch in the grains. It has some resistance or bite (\"al dente\") and separate grains. The traditional texture is fairly fluid, or \"all'onda\" (\"wavy, or flowing in waves\"). It is served on flat dishes and should easily spread out but not have excess watery liquid around the perimeter. It must be eaten at once, as it continues to cook in its own heat, making the grains absorb all the liquid and become soft and dry.\n\nMany variations have their own names:\n\n"}
{"id": "712162", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=712162", "title": "Funnel cake", "text": "Funnel cake\n\nFunnel cake (Drechderkuche in Pennsylvania German) is a regional food popular in North America at carnivals, fairs, sporting events, and seaside resorts.\n\nThe concept of the funnel cake dates back to the early medieval Persian world, where similar yeast-risen dishes were first prepared and later spread to Europe. Pennsylvania Dutch immigrants brought the yeast dish, known as Drechderkuche, to America and around 1879 developed the baking powder version along with its new name, funnel cake.\n\nFunnel cakes are made by pouring batter into hot cooking oil in a circular pattern and deep frying the overlapping mass until golden-brown. The batter is commonly poured through a funnel creating its texture and giving its name. When made at concession stands, a pitcher with an integral funnel spout is employed. Alton Brown recommends they be baked with choux pastry, which expands from steam produced by its high water content.\n\nFunnel cakes are typically served plain with powdered sugar, but can also be served with jam/jelly, cinnamon, chocolate, fresh fruit, or other toppings.\n\nThey are similar in recipe to angel wings, the difference being the density of the mix. The dough for angel wings is viscous enough to be cut into shapes and dropped into the oil by hand.\n\nIn south German cuisine the equivalent is called \"Strauben\" or \"Strieble\" and is made and served similarly. In Finnish cuisine the analogous \"tippaleipä\" (literally droplet bread) is traditionally served at May Day (Vappu) celebrations alongside with sima. In Lithuania it is called skruzdėlynas, which literally translates as 'ant nest'. It is normally made in early spring to empty last year's honey stock and make more space for the new one, and at the first harvest of honey.\n\nIn the Indian subcontinent a similar dessert, with a crystallized sugary exterior coating, is called jalebi; in Iran this is known as \"zulbia\" and is a popular dessert. These differ from funnel cake in using no baking powder, which results in a somewhat chewy texture.\n\n\"Kumukunsi\" is another similar native doughnut from the Maguindanao people in the Philippines. It is made with rice flour, duck eggs, and sugar that is molded into rope-like strands and then fried in a loose spiral. They have the taste and consistency of creamy pancakes.\n\nIn North America, funnel cakes were originally associated with Pennsylvania Dutch Country. It is one of the first North American fried foods, which is associated with the Pennsylvania Dutch, German immigrants who came to Pennsylvania in the 17th and 18th centuries. The Pennsylvania Dutch called the first funnel cakes drechter kuche. The name “funnel” later came from the technique used to make the cakes, in which the pancake-like batter is poured into hot oil through a funnel.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "713060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=713060", "title": "Aurora (mythology)", "text": "Aurora (mythology)\n\nAurora () is the Latin word for dawn, and the goddess of dawn in Roman mythology and Latin poetry.\nLike Greek \"Eos\" and Rigvedic \"Ushas\", \"Aurora\" continues the name of an earlier Indo-European dawn goddess, \"Hausos\".\n\nIn Roman mythology, Aurora renews herself every morning and flies across the sky, announcing the arrival of the sun. Her parentage was flexible: for Ovid, she could equally be \"Pallantis\", signifying the daughter of Pallas, or the daughter of Hyperion. She has two siblings, a brother (Sol, the sun) and a sister (Luna, the moon). Roman writers rarely imitated Hesiod and later Greek poets by naming Aurora as the mother of the Anemoi (the Winds), who were the offspring of Astraeus, the father of the stars.\n\nAurora appears most often in sexual poetry with one of her mortal lovers. A myth taken from the Greek by Roman poets tells that one of her lovers was the prince of Troy, Tithonus. Tithonus was a mortal, and would therefore age and die. Wanting to be with her lover for all eternity, Aurora asked Jupiter to grant immortality to Tithonus. Jupiter granted her wish, but she failed to ask for eternal youth to accompany his immortality, and he became forever old. Aurora turned him into a cicada.\n\nFrom Homer's \"Iliad\":\n\nShakespeare's \"Romeo and Juliet\" (I.i), Montague says of his lovesick son Romeo\nIn traditional Irish folk songs, such as \"Lord Courtown\":\nIn \"On Imagination\" by Phillis Wheatley:\nIn the poem \"Tithonus\" by Alfred, Lord Tennyson, Aurora is described thus:\nIn singer-songwriter Björk's \"Vespertine\" track, Aurora is described as\nThe post-punk rock band The Sexual Side Effects's track \"Aurora\" alludes to the goddess:\nIn Chapter 8 of Charlotte Brontë's \"Villette\", Madame Beck fires her old Governess first thing in the morning and is described by the narrator, Lucy Snowe: \"All this, I say, was done between the moment of Madame Beck's issuing like Aurora from her chamber, and that in which she coolly sat down to pour out her first cup of coffee.\"\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "713442", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=713442", "title": "Lemon &amp; Paeroa", "text": "Lemon &amp; Paeroa\n\nLemon & Paeroa, also known as L&P, is a sweet soft drink manufactured in New Zealand. Created in 1907, it was traditionally made by combining lemon juice with carbonated mineral water from the town of Paeroa, but is now owned and manufactured by multi-national Coca-Cola.\n\nLemon & Paeroa is widely available in New Zealand. It is also available in Coles supermarkets in Australia, in Gourmet Burger Kitchen restaurants in the United Kingdom, and in some specialty stores. L&P is also used as a mixer in New Zealand bars, particularly with Southern Comfort.\n\nThe comically pretentious advertising slogan \"World famous in New Zealand\" has become a popular New Zealand saying. It is used to describe items that are famous within New Zealand but unknown in the rest of the world, and implies that similar items and people in larger countries would have a far higher media profile and would be famous worldwide.\n\nIn 2005 \"\"Sweet As\" L&P\" with artificial sweetener aspartame was introduced with the modified slogan \"World Famous in New Zealand since quite recently\", and the traditional product began being advertised as \"World Famous in New Zealand since Ages ago\".\n\nAnalysis of Paeroa mineral water by Arthur Wohlman in 1904 revealed magnesium bicarbonate in a concentration of 73 grains to the gallon (1040 mg/L). In 1908 the property containing the mineral spring was purchased by Robert Fewell and his brother-in-law Frank Brinkler.\n\nTheir company Paeroa Natural Mineral Water Company, bottled the spring water until 1915 when they sold the company to Menzies and Company who, in turn, opened a new factory in Paeroa in 1926. In the late 1940s 'Lemon and Paeroa' and 'Paeroa and Lemon' were both marketed. In 1963 Menzies and Co merged with Hamilton-based bottlers CL Innes, and L&P took on the \"Innes Tartan\" as a motif on the neck of the L&P bottle. This continued until the late 1970s, when L&P was taken over by Oasis Industries, before it was, in turn, taken over by Coca Cola.\n\nIn the early 1960s, a collaboration of New Zealand music artists recorded a cover of Martha and the Vandellas song \"(Love is Like A) Heat Wave\", to promote the drink.\n\nL&P itself is now made by Coca-Cola in Auckland, on the same production line as the company's other beverages. However, there is a giant L&P bottle in Paeroa near the site where the product was originally manufactured. The company has also licensed an official L&P Kiwiana shop and café.\n\n"}
{"id": "714128", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=714128", "title": "Green sauce", "text": "Green sauce\n\nGreen sauce is a family of cold, uncooked sauces based on herbs, including the Spanish and Italian \"salsa verde\", the French \"sauce verte\", the German \"Grüne Soße\" or \"Frankfurter Grie Soß\" (Frankfurt dialect), and the Argentinian \"chimichurri\".\n\nThe Mexican \"salsa verde\", though also called a \"green sauce\", is instead based on tomatillos; the New Mexico version uses a green chile base.\n\nThe basic recipe is probably from the Near East and, as such, is probably at least 2,000 years old. Roman legionaries brought it to Italy, from where it was exported to France and Germany. Evidence suggests that it was introduced in Kassel by the Italian trading families Bolongaro and Crevenna around 1700.\n\nA possible origin of the German variant are French Protestant immigrants emigrating to Kurhessen in the 18th century. The German variant uses a different mix of herbs, since Mediterranean herbs were not available in Germany at the time.\n\nThe Italian \"salsa verde\" is a cold rustic sauce, and includes parsley, vinegar, capers, garlic, onion, anchovies, olive oil, and possibly mustard. The ingredients are coarsely chopped, formerly by hand, now often in a food processor. In some regions, cubed bread is soaked in vinegar and blended with the other ingredients, which creates an emulsion somewhat similar to a vinaigrette. In other regions, there is no bread.\n\nSalsa verde is used as a condiment or dipping sauce for meats, fish, poultry, or vegetables. Salsa verde is traditionally served as an accompaniment to bollito misto or grilled or stewed fish.\n\nThe French \"sauce verte au pain\" was already known in the Renaissance, and was originally a bread sauce very similar to the Italian. Today the term frequently refers to a kind of mayonnaise flavoured with tarragon, and sometimes parsley and sage. Lemon juice is often used instead of vinegar.\n\n\"Grüne Soße\" is a specialty of the German state of Hesse. Centres of popularity are the cities of Frankfurt am Main (where it is sometimes called \"\"Grie Soß\"\") and Kassel, which lay claim to its origins. The Frankfurt-style is made exclusively from seven fresh herbs, namely parsley, chives, chervil, borage, sorrel, garden cress, and salad burnet together with sour cream, oil, vinegar, mustard, salt and added hard boiled eggs. (City of Frankfurt official page)\nVariants of other local areas, often due to seasonal availability, include dill, shallots, lovage, lemon balm, and even spinach. In more frugal times, daisy leaves, broad plantain leaves, and dandelion leaves were also used.\n\nWhile both Grüne Soße and mayonnaise have an egg base, there are major differences. In Grüne Soße, the eggs are hard-boiled, then sieved or pureed before being mixed with sour cream to form the creamy base of the sauce. The fresh chopped herbs are then added. Some variations use buttermilk, quark, or yogurt instead of sour cream. In the city of Kassel, a combination of sour cream and Schmand is used.\n\nThe sauce is served cold with peeled boiled potatoes or just with rye bread, as an accompaniment to either hard-boiled eggs or roast beef brisket. It may also be served with cooked fish or roast beef, or as a side dish to barbecue. A local schnitzel specialty, called Frankfurter Schnitzel, is always served with green sauce, along with apple cider (Apfelwein) as a traditional accompanying drink. Green sauce was supposedly Goethe's favourite condiment; a legend that his mother invented it is likely apocryphal.\n\nThe local importance of the dish is shown by the abundance of green sauce at local markets and by the Green Sauce Monument installed in Frankfurt-Oberrad in 2007. The latter consists of seven small greenhouses with the main herbal ingredients and was part of the Luminale, a local art and light event.\n\nIn many Hessian families, Green Sauce is part of the traditional meal eaten on Maundy Thursday, relating to its German name Gründonnerstag (literally Green Thursday).\n\nChimichurri is a popular sauce in Argentina and other parts of Latin America, usually served on grilled meat.\n\nGreen goddess is a green sauce used as a salad dressing. Based on the French \"sauce verte\", it is also made with tarragon, parsley, mayonnaise, sour cream, and lemon juice, but also includes anchovies.\n"}
{"id": "714791", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=714791", "title": "Aliʻi", "text": "Aliʻi\n\nAliʻi in the Hawaiian language refers to the hereditary line of rulers, the \"noho aliʻi\", of the Hawaiian Islands. \"Aliʻi\" has a similar meaning in the Samoan language and other Polynesian languages, and is a cognate of the Māori word \"ariki\".\n\nIn ancient Hawaiian society, the \"aliʻi\" were the hereditary nobles (social class or caste). The \"aliʻi\" consisted of the higher and lesser chiefs of the various levels within the islands. The \"noho aliʻi\" were the ruling chiefs. The \"aliʻi\" were believed to be descended from the gods. They governed with divine power called \"mana\" which was derived from the spiritual energy of their ancestors. \n\nThere were eleven classes of \"aliʻi\", of both men and women. These included the \"kahuna\" (priest/priestess, experts, craftsmen and canoe maker) as part of four professions practiced by the nobility. Each island had its own aliʻi nui, who governed their individual systems. \"Aliʻi\" continued to rule the Hawaiian islands until 1893, when Queen Liliʻuokalani was overthrown by a coup d'état backed by the United States government.\n\n\"Aliʻi nui\" were ruling chiefs (in Hawaiian, \"nui\" means grand, great, or supreme.). The \"nui\" title could be passed on by right of birth.\n\nSamuel M. Kamakau writes extensively about the aliʻi nui and kaukau aliʻi lines and their importance to Hawaiian history.\n\n\nOne kaukau aliʻi line descended from Moana Kāne, son of Keakealanikane, became secondary aliʻi to the Kamehameha rulers of the kingdom and were responsible for various \"hana lawelawe\" (service tasks). Members of this line married into the Kamehamehas, including Charles Kanaʻina and Kekūanāoʻa. Some bore \"Kāhili\", royal standards made of feathers, and were attendants of the higher-ranking \"aliʻi\". During the monarchy some of these chiefs were elevated to positions within the primary political bodies of the Hawaiian legislature and the king's Privy Council. All Hawaiian monarchs after Kamehameha III were the children of Kaukaualiʻi fathers who married higher ranking wives.\n\n\nInternecine warfare between heirs of rulers was common in ancient Hawaiʻi. Warfare between chiefs was also common.\n\nCommoner or lesser \"Aliʻi\" served the higher-ranking \"Aliʻi\", not for pay, but instead, due to their duty to allegiance to the nation.\n\nThe caste organization facilitated a feudal system that resembles other feudal societies, for example the feudal systems found in Europe circa 1000 AD, in feudal Japan, Ethiopia, and so on.\n\nHigher \"aliʻi\" gave lesser \"aliʻi\" parcels of land, which those lesser \"aliʻi\" would in turn govern. The lesser \"aliʻi\" divided the land into plots to be farmed and cultivated by makaʻāinana families. Harvests were returned to the lesser \"aliʻi\", each taking a portion before sending tribute to the supreme \"aliʻi\".\n\nBoth the reigning dynasties of the united Hawaiian Kingdom (1810–1893) were of \"aliʻi\" class. As each relative of those dynasties was entitled to the title \"aliʻi\", they have later, posthumously, been popularly labeled (mostly erroneously) princesses and princes. But only a limited number of royal relatives ever received the princely title from the monarch.\n\n1843 Kamehameha named his country the Hawaiian Kingdom to distinguish it from the former \"Sandwich Isles\" proclaimed by Capt. Cook in 1798. On November 28, 1843, at the Court of London, the British and French governments entered into a formal agreement to recognize Hawaiian independence.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "715760", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=715760", "title": "Fried dough", "text": "Fried dough\n\nFried dough is a North American food associated with outdoor food stands in carnivals, amusement parks, fairs, rodeos, and seaside resorts (though it can be made at home). \"Fried dough\" is the specific name for a particular variety of fried bread made of a yeast dough; see the accompanying images for an example of use on carnival-booth signs. Fried dough is also known as fry dough, fry bread (bannock), fried bread, doughboys, elephant ears, scones, pizza fritte, frying saucers, and \"buñuelos\" (in the case of smaller pieces). These foods are virtually identical to each other, and recognizably different from other fried dough foods such as doughnuts, beignets, or fritters.\n\nIn Canadian cuisine, pieces of fried dough are sometimes called beaver tails. According to Bill Castleman, a writer of books on Canadian word origins, the name referred to quick-baked dough \"especially in early 19th-century places where people might camp for one night and where there was no frying pan.\" In 1978, Pam and Grant Hooker of Ottawa, Ontario, founded the BeaverTails chain of restaurants specializing in the sale of fried dough pastries which are hand stretched to the shape of a beaver's tail. \n\nIn Newfoundland, a province in Eastern Canada, fried dough is referred to as a \"touton\". A touton /ˈtaʊtən is produced by frying bread dough on a pan with butter or the leftover fat from \"scrunchions\" (fried preserved pork) and served with dark molasses, maple syrup, or corn syrup. It is traditionally made from leftover bread dough and pan-fried, as opposed to deep-fried.\n\nA smaller Italian variant common in North America is the \"zeppole.\"\n\nSimilar food is found in Europe, also typically from outdoor stands in fairs. For example, in Croatia, fried dough is known as \"languši\", in Hungary as lángos, in Austria as kiachl, in Germany as Knieküchle while the oliebol is eaten in the Netherlands.\n\nA type of soft, fried dough ball frequently coated in sugar can be found in some Chinese restaurants in New York. These dough balls are referred to by any one of a number of names, including but not necessarily limited to \"sugar biscuits\", \"Chinese doughnuts\", or the simpler \"fried bread\".\n\nTurkic countries in Central Asia also have a similar food called Boortsog or Pişi.\n\nFried dough is made by deep-frying a portion of risen yeast dough. The dough acquires an irregular, bubbly appearance from being fried.\n\nThe dough may then be sprinkled with a variety of toppings, such as granulated sugar, powdered sugar, cinnamon, fruit sauce, chocolate sauce, cheese, maple syrup, whipped cream, tomato sauce, garlic butter, lemon juice, honey, butter, nuts, or a combination of these.\n\n"}
{"id": "716825", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=716825", "title": "Vickers Tank Periscope MK.IV", "text": "Vickers Tank Periscope MK.IV\n\nThe Gundlach Periscope, usually known under its British designation as Vickers Tank Periscope MK.IV, was a revolutionary invention by Polish engineer Rudolf Gundlach, manufactured for Polish 7TP tanks since end of 1935 and patented in 1936 as \"Gundlach Peryskop obrotowy\". It was the first device to allow the tank commander to have a 360-degree view from his turret with a single periscope. By rotating the periscope and allowing the tank commander to look backwards through the second eyepiece, he no longer had to change position to look behind the turret. Early tanks had small turrets and fixed seating, without an independently rotating cupola, and so the commander wasn't easily able to move himself to another rear-facing periscope.\n\nThe design was first used in the Polish 7TP light tank. Shortly before the war it was given to the British and was used in almost all tanks of WWII, including the British Crusader, Churchill, Valentine, and Cromwell and the American Sherman. After the German and Soviet attack and fall of Poland in 1939 it was copied entirely from captured 7TP and TKS Polish tanks and later by USSR (including the T-34 and T-70).\n\nAs a part of Polish-British pre-war military cooperation, the patent was sold for a penny (actually 1 Polish Zloty) to Vickers-Armstrong. It was produced as the Vickers Tank Periscope MK.IV (pictured), and built into all British tanks (Crusader, Churchill, Valentine, Cromwell). After the fall of Poland, Germany, USSR and Romania captured some equipment, allowing them to copy the invention. In USSR the Gundlach periscope was known as MK-4 (harking to the British designation, as Russian sources openly confirm that it was copied from samples acquired with British-supplied tanks) and implemented in all tanks (including the T-34 and T-70). Later technology was transferred to USA and as a periscope M6 implemented in all US tanks (M3/M5 Stuart, M4 Sherman and others). At the end of World War II this technology was adopted throughout the world and used basically unchanged for almost 50 years, until it was replaced by electronic devices.\n\n"}
{"id": "724693", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=724693", "title": "Rack of lamb", "text": "Rack of lamb\n\nA rack of lamb or carré d'agneau (though this may also refer to other cuts) is a cut of lamb cut perpendicularly to the spine, and including 16 ribs or chops. At retail, it is usually sold 'single' (sawn longitudinally and including the 8 ribs on one side only), but may also be sold as a \"double rack of lamb\", with the ribs on both sides. Alternatively, two French trimmed racks may be placed together with the ribs interlinked; when configured this way it is often known as a 'Guard of honour' . \n\nRack of lamb is usually roasted, sometimes first coated with a herbed breadcrumb persillade. The tips of the bones are sometimes decorated with paper frills called manchettes.\n\nTwo or three single racks of lamb tied into a circle make a \"crown roast of lamb\". Crown roasts are sometimes cooked with (ground-lamb) stuffing in the middle.\n\nRack of lamb is often French trimmed (also known as Frenching in the United States), that is, the rib bones are exposed by cutting off the fat and meat covering them. Typically, three inches (7-8 cm) of bone beyond the main muscle (the rib eye or Longissimus dorsi) are left on the rack, with the top two inches (5 cm) exposed.\n\n"}
{"id": "724786", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=724786", "title": "Nata de coco", "text": "Nata de coco\n\nNata de coco (also marketed as \"coconut gel\") is a chewy, translucent, jelly-like food produced by the fermentation of coconut water, which gels through the production of microbial cellulose by \"Komagataeibacter xylinus\". Originating in the Philippines, \"nata de coco\" is most commonly sweetened as a candy or dessert, and can accompany a variety of foods, including pickles, drinks, ice cream, puddings, and fruit cocktails.\n\n\"Nata de coco\" was first created in 1973 in the Philippines by attempting to preserve coconut water as a jelly-like substance. Its name comes from the Spanish, and means \"cream of coconut\" or \"coconut milk-skin\". In the 20th century, the demand for coconuts increased. Products from coconuts became a major export product of the Philippines, including \"nata de coco\".\n\n\"Nata de Coco\" is mainly made from coconut water, so it has a modest nutritional profile. One cup of Nata de Coco (118 grams) contains 109 calories, 1 gram of protein and 7 grams of carbohydrates. It is often characterized as healthful since it contains dietary fiber to aid digestion while carrying fewer calories compared to other desserts, gram for gram.\n\nCommercially made \"nata de coco\" is made by small farms in Thailand, Malaysia, the Philippines, especially in Laguna and Quezon, and Indonesia, especially in the Special Region of Yogyakarta, and in Thailand, it is commonly sold in jars.\n\nThe primarily coconut water dessert is produced through the following steps:\n\n\n\"Nata de coco\" can be consumed on its own, but it can be used as an ingredient as well for fruit salads, coconut cakes, ice creams, soft drinks, bubble tea, and yoghurts.\n\n"}
{"id": "725256", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=725256", "title": "Consommé", "text": "Consommé\n\nIn cooking, a consommé is a type of clear soup made from richly flavored stock, or bouillon that has been clarified, a process that uses egg whites to remove fat and sediment.\n\nConsommé has three English pronunciations: traditionally in the UK, the stress is on the middle syllable; in modern UK English, the stress is on the first; and in the US the stress is on the last.\n\nA consommé is made by adding a mixture of ground meats, together with mirepoix (a combination of carrots, celery, and onion), tomatoes, and egg whites into either bouillon or stock. The key to making a high quality consommé is simmering; the act of simmering, combined with frequent stirring, brings impurities to the surface of the liquid, which are further drawn out due to the presence of acid from the tomatoes. Eventually, the solids begin to congeal at the surface of the liquid, forming a 'raft', which is caused by the proteins in the egg whites. Once the 'raft' begins to form, the heat is reduced, and the consommé is simmered at a lower heat until it reaches the desired flavor, which usually takes anywhere from 45 minutes to over an hour. The resulting concoction is a clear liquid that has either a rich amber colour (for beef or veal consommé) or a very pale yellow colour (for poultry consommé). It is then carefully drawn from the pot and passed again through a filter to ensure its purity, and is then put through a lengthy process where all of the visible fat is skimmed from the surface. To ensure total purification, the consommé can be refrigerated, which draws out remaining fat, which can easily be skimmed off with a cheesecloth. Alternatively, the consommé can be placed in a wide, shallow container such as a sauté pan or large bowl and wide strips of parchment paper can be dragged along the surface; the tiny amounts of remaining fat adhere to the parchment, leaving the consommé perfectly de-greased. Cartilage and tendons should be left on the meat because of the gelatin they contain, which enhances the mouthfeel of the soup. If beef or veal is used, shin meat is ideal because it is very low in fat and very high in gristle, and although it is undesirable for most other purposes, it is near essential for the flavour of the consommé. The meat is best if it is ground very fine, as if for a mousseline.\n\nConsommés are usually served piping hot because they tend to cool down more quickly than other soups and form a gel. They are most often served with garnishes, which vary in complexity from a simple splash of sherry or egg yolk, to cut vegetables, to shaped savory custards called 'royales'.\n\nA large amount of meat only yields a small amount of consommé; in some recipes, as much as 500 g (a little over a pound) of meat can go into a single 250 mL (8.2 fl oz) serving. This low-yield is part of what has traditionally given consommé its refined reputation as a dish fit for the higher levels of society and not consumed among the poorer classes, who could not afford such extravagance.\n\nOther types of consommé such as a tomato consommé are traditionally served chilled, this keeps the clearness of the consommé.\n\nDouble consommé is a consommé made to double strength. There are at least three methods of producing a double consommé, the first of which is doubling the quantity of meat used in the recipe, the second of which is producing a normal strength consommé and reducing it to half its volume, and the third of which is producing a consommé with all water in the recipe replaced with equal quantities of an already-prepared consommé. It is often found in other cold-cuisine items, especially those that use aspic, or natural gelatin.\n\nAnother common variation is chilled or jellied consommé. They are served cold and thickened naturally by the gelatin extracted from the bones when the original stock is made. The gelatin gives the consommé a gelatinous texture when set to cool. Additional gelatin may be added during the last part of the clarification process to ensure that it sets properly.\n\nConsommé Madrilène is a crystal-clear soup that is pure and clean-tasting, typically flavored with tomato, and served chilled.\n\nIn a 2007 \"New York Times\" article, Harold McGee popularized an alternative method for clarifying broths, originating among chefs of the molecular gastronomy movement: gelatin filtration. Gelatin-filtration is a novel method of clarification, relying on some of the properties of a super-saturated solution of gelatin, created by freezing, to remove macroscopic particles that cause cloudiness from a water-based stock. This method is distinct from traditional consommé both in technique and in final product, as gelatin filtration results in a gelatin-free broth, while traditional consommé gives a final product rich in gelatin, with a correspondingly rich mouthfeel.\n\nFreezing a water-based solution converts all bulk water into ice crystals, but water associated with solutes—in the case of a soup stock, gelatin, fat, and flavor compounds—remains unfrozen to much lower temperatures; in practice, the freezing temperature of this associated water is well below the reach of conventional freezers. Thus, gelatin filtration works by freezing a gelatin-containing, water-based solution and then allowing it to thaw in a mesh strainer at just above the freezing temperature of water. The gelatin and other solutes concentrate in the unfrozen, associated water, and the gelatin forms a stable network through cross-linking, just as it would in a standard gel. This stable network acts as a filter, trapping large particles of fat or protein, while allowing water and smaller, flavor-active compounds to pass. As the bulk water melts, it passes first through the gelatin network and then through the mesh strainer, into a receiving vessel. Because the temperature is kept just above the freezing point, the bulk water melts slowly and, as it is strained into a separate vessel, it is never in contact with the gelatin for long enough to begin dissolving the gelatin network. After all of the bulk water melts, the gelatin network remains in the strainer with the trapped macroscopic particles, and the clarified stock (the bulk water and flavor compounds) is collected in the receiving vessel.\n\nBecause gelatin-filtered consommés do not require a creation of an egg-white raft as in traditional consommés, they are less wasteful. The technique is also applicable to a wider range of \"stocks\": since no heating is required, heat-sensitive materials, such as fruit juices, can be clarified by first adding a small amount of gelatin, then applying gelatin filtration. A number of non-traditional consommés, not based on stock, have been created using this method, including a \"pretzel consommé\", a \"Doritos consommé\", a \"brown butter consommé\", and a \"spiced pumpkin consommé\".\n\nLoss of gelatin essential to gelatin filtration results in a consommé with significantly less-rich mouthfeel than a traditional consommé, and also affects the properties of the consommé upon chilling. A traditional consommé gels when chilled, while a gelatin-filtered consommé does not.\n\nClarified broths called consommés have been in use since the Middle Ages, taking many forms from simple soups, to soups made from the meat of a wide variety of less-common animals.\n\nA special type of consommé that was boiled solely with tendons and cartilage without the addition of salt was sweetened, flavoured with fruits and served as dessert. These sweetened consommé creations are essentially the forerunners of present-day gelatin desserts.\n\n"}
{"id": "726379", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=726379", "title": "Clam chowder", "text": "Clam chowder\n\nClam chowder is any of several chowder soups containing clams and broth. In addition to clams, common ingredients include diced potatoes, onions, and celery. Other vegetables are not typically used, but small carrot strips or a garnish of parsley might occasionally be added primarily for color. A garnish of bay leaves adds both color and flavor. It is believed that clams were used in chowder because of the relative ease of harvesting them. Clam chowder is usually served with saltine crackers or small, hexagonal oyster crackers.\n\nThe dish originated in the Eastern United States, but is now commonly served in restaurants throughout the country, particularly on Fridays when American Catholics traditionally abstained from meat. Many regional variations exist, but the two most prevalent are New England or \"white\" clam chowder and Rhode Island / Manhattan or \"red\" clam chowder.\n\nThe earliest-established and most popular variety of clam chowder, New England clam chowder, was introduced to the region by French, Nova Scotian, or British settlers, becoming common in the 18th century. The first recipe for another variety, Manhattan clam chowder, known for using tomatoes and its consequently distinctly red coloring, was published in 1934. In 1939, the New England state of Maine debated legislation that would outlaw the use of tomatoes in chowder, thereby essentially prohibiting the \"Manhattan\" form.\n\nSince the popularity of New England clam chowder spread throughout the United States in the 19th and 20th centuries, many other regions have introduced their own, local twists on the traditional recipe.\n\nThis variety typically consists of pre-fried cubed salt pork, salt water, potatoes, diced onions, quahog clams, butter, salt, and pepper. This variety was more common in the early and mid-20th century, and likely shares most recent common ancestry with New England clam chowder.\n\nServed throughout North Carolina's Outer Banks region, this variation of clam chowder has clear broth, bacon, potatoes, onions, and flour as a thickening agent. It is usually seasoned with copious amounts of white and/or black pepper, and occasionally with chopped green onions or even hot pepper sauce.\n\nLong Island clam chowder is a variant that is part New England-style and part Manhattan-style, making it a creamy tomato clam chowder. The name is a geographical pun, noting that the location of Long Island, just like the recipe, is about halfway between Manhattan and New England. This variant is popular in many small restaurants across Suffolk County, New York.\n\nManhattan clam chowder has red broth, which is tomato-based. The addition of tomatoes in place of milk was initially the work of Portuguese immigrants in Rhode Island, as tomato-based stews were already a traditional part of Portuguese cuisine.\n\nIn the 1890s, this chowder was called \"Fulton Fish Market clam chowder\" and \"New York City clam chowder.\" Manhattan clam chowder was referenced in Victor Hirtzler's \"Hotel St. Francis Cookbook\" (1919).\n\nMinorcan clam chowder is a spicy traditional version found in Florida restaurants near St. Augustine and the northeast corner of Florida. It has a tomato broth base, with a \"secret ingredient\", Spanish datil pepper, an extremely hot chili comparable to the habanero. The datil pepper is believed to have been brought to St. Augustine by the Menorcan settlers in the 18th century, and tradition holds among Menorcan descendants that it will only thrive and grow in two places: Menorca, Spain and St. Augustine, Florida.\n\nNew England clam chowder, occasionally referred to as Boston Clam Chowder in the Midwest, is a milk or cream-based chowder, and is often of a thicker consistency than other regional styles, even though traditionally it is rather thin (with many late 19th and early 20th century recipes using condensed milk as the base). It is commonly made with potatoes, onion, and clams.\n\nNew England clam chowder is usually accompanied by oyster crackers. Crown Pilot Crackers were a popular brand of cracker to accompany chowder, until the product was discontinued in 2008. Crackers may be crushed and mixed into the soup for thickener, or used as a garnish.\nIts primary ingredients are chowder clams, onion, bacon, diced potatoes, pepper, celery powder, parsley, paprika or Old Bay seasoning, asparagus, light cream, and sliced tomatoes.\n\nTraditional Rhode Island clam chowder—going back decades—is a red chowder and is served as Rhode Island clam chowder throughout the state. Rhode Island clam chowder has a tomato broth base and potatoes, but unlike Manhattan red chowder, Rhode Island clam chowder has no chunks of tomato and does not contain other vegetables. The origins of traditional Rhode Island clam chowder are reportedly Portuguese immigrants in Rhode Island dating back over a century. This recipe has been served for decades with clamcakes at memorable establishments like Rocky Point and Crescent Park. Rhode Island clam (red) chowder is served principally and especially at long-established New England restaurants and hotels.\n\nA secondary Rhode Island clam chowder has a clear broth and be found commonly along a stretch of the south coast of New England from eastern Connecticut to southwestern Rhode Island. In southwestern Rhode Island, this clear clam chowder is sometimes called \"South County Style\" referring to the colloquial name of Washington County, Rhode Island, where reportedly it originated; however in other parts of New England, this clear clam chowder is called Noank Clam Chowder. This clear clam chowder, which generally contains quahogs, broth, potatoes, onions, and bacon, is served mostly along a stretch of the south coast of New England from southwestern Rhode Island, including on Block Island.\n\nSome restaurants serve their own unique clam chowders that do not fall into any specific categories. For example:\n\n\n"}
{"id": "727909", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=727909", "title": "Café au lait", "text": "Café au lait\n\nCafé au lait (; ; French for \"coffee with milk\") is the same as white coffee. It differs from white coffee, which is coffee with cold milk or other whitener added.\n\nIn Europe, \"café au lait\" stems from the same continental tradition as \"café con leche\" in Spain, \"kawa biała\" (\"white coffee\") in Poland, \"Milchkaffee\" (\"milk coffee\") in Germany, \"tejeskávé\" in Hungary, \"koffie verkeerd\" (\"incorrect coffee\") in the Netherlands and Flanders, and \"café com leite\" (“coffee with milk\") in Portugal and Brazil. In the French-speaking areas of Switzerland, a popular variation is the \"café renversé\" (“reverse coffee\"), which is made by using the milk as a base and adding espresso, in reversal of the normal method of making a \"café au lait\". In Andalusia, Southern Spain, a similar variation is called \"manchado\" (“stained\"). In northern Europe, \"café au lait\" is the name most often used in coffee shops.\n\nAt home, \"café au lait\" can be prepared from dark coffee and \"heated\" milk; in cafés, it has been prepared on espresso machines from espresso and \"steamed\" milk ever since these machines became available in the 1940s—thus it merely refers to a \"coffee and milk\" combination, depending on the location, not to a specific drink.\n\n\"Café au lait\" and \"caffè latte\" are used as contrasting terms, to indicate whether the beverage is served in the \"French\" or the \"Italian\" way, the former being in a white porcelain cup or bowl, the latter in a kitchen glass and always made from an espresso machine, whereas \"café au lait\" might be espresso- or dark coffee-based.\n\nIn many American coffeehouses, a \"café au lait\" is a drink of strong drip brewed or French pressed coffee, to which steamed milk is added; this contrasts with a \"caffè latte\", which uses espresso as a base. American \"café au lait\" is generally served in a cup, as with brewed coffee, being served in a bowl only at shops which wish to emphasize French tradition.\n\n\"Café au lait\" is a popular drink in New Orleans, available at coffee shops like Café du Monde and Morning Call Coffee Stand, where it is made with milk and coffee mixed with chicory, giving it a strong, bitter taste. Unlike the European café style, a New Orleans-style \"café au lait\" is made with scalded milk (milk warmed over heat to just below boiling), rather than with steamed milk. The use of roasted chicory root as an extender in coffee became common in Louisiana during the American Civil War, when Union naval blockades cut off the Port of New Orleans, forcing citizens to stretch out the coffee supply. In New Orleans, café au lait is traditionally drunk while eating beignets dusted with powdered sugar, which offsets the bitterness of the chicory. The taste for coffee and chicory was developed by the French during their civil war. Coffee was scarce during those times, and they found that chicory added body and flavor to the brew. The Acadians from Nova Scotia brought this taste and many other french customs (heritage) to Louisiana.\n\n"}
{"id": "729594", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=729594", "title": "Glenfiddich", "text": "Glenfiddich\n\nGlenfiddich is a Speyside single malt Scotch whisky owned and produced by William Grant & Sons in Dufftown, Scotland. \"Glenfiddich\" means \"valley of the deer\" in Scottish Gaelic, which is why the Glenfiddich logo is a stag.\n\nGlenfiddich is the world's best-selling single-malt whisky and also the most awarded at the International Spirits Challenge.\n\nThe Glenfiddich Distillery was founded in 1886 by William Grant in Dufftown, Scotland, in the glen of the River Fiddich. The Glenfiddich single malt whisky first ran from the stills on Christmas Day, 1887.\n\nIn the 1920s, with prohibition in force in the USA, Glenfiddich was one of a very small number of distilleries to increase production. This put them in a strong position to meet the sudden rise in demand for fine aged whiskies that came with the repeal of prohibition.\n\nIn the 1950s, the Grant family built up an onsite infrastructure that included coppersmiths to maintain the copper stills, and a dedicated cooperage that is now one of the very few remaining in distilleries. In 1956 the Grant's brand launched the now-iconic triangular bottle, designed by Hans Schleger.\n\nFollowing difficult times in the 1960s and '70s, many small, independent distillers were bought up or went out of business. In order to survive, W. Grant & Sons expanded their production of the drink, and introduced advertising campaigns and a visitors' centre. In this period they also took the decision to begin marketing single malt as a premium brand in its own right, effectively creating the modern single malt whisky category.\n\nLater, W. Grant & Sons was one of the first distilleries to package its bottles in tubes and gift tins, as well as recognising the importance of the duty-free market for spirits. This marketing strategy was successful, and Glenfiddich has now become the world's best-selling single malt. It is sold in 180 countries, and accounts for about 35% of single malt sales.\n\nGlenfiddich is currently managed by the fifth generation of William Grant's descendants.\n\nIn September 2014, William Grant & Sons agreed to acquire Drambuie for an undisclosed price rumoured to be in the region of £100 million.\n\nGlenfiddich whisky is produced at the Glenfiddich Distillery in Dufftown, Moray.\n\nGlenfiddich is a single malt Scotch whisky, this means the whisky was distilled at a single distillery using a pot still distillation process and must be made from a mash of malted grain.\n\nOnsite there are 32 distinctively-shaped \"swan neck\" copper pot stills. These stills are smaller than those now in use at most other major distilleries. All stills are handmade and Glenfiddich employs a dedicated team of craftsmen and coppersmiths to maintain them. These stills have a capacity of around 13,000,000 litres of spirit.\n\nThe water source for Glenfiddich Whisky is The Robbie Dhu springs nearby to the distillery.\n\nGlenfiddich is matured in many different casks such as: \nOnce the spirit has matured, the casks are emptied and the whisky is \"cut\" with pure Robbie Dhu spring water.\n\nGlenfiddich has a dedicated bottling hall onsite along with a large bottling plant in Bellshill.\n\n\n\nGlenfiddich's whiskies have performed well at international spirits ratings competitions. The 12, 15, 18, and 21-year offerings have all rated well in the San Francisco World Spirits Competition and the Beverage Testing Institutes' reviews. On balance, the 15-year whisky has performed the best, receiving three double-gold medals (in four years) at the 2007–2010 San Francisco competitions and a score of 91 with the Beverage Testing Institute. \nStarted in 1970, Glenfiddich promoted the Glenfiddich Food and Drink Awards to honour distinguished writing and broadcasting in the fields of food and drink in the UK. In 2008, Glenfiddich decided to discontinue distributing Food and Drink Awards, reviewing their \"strategy, scope and potential application in some of Glenfiddich’s key markets outside the UK.\"\n\nStarted in 1998, Glenfiddich promoted the Glenfiddich Spirit of Scotland Awards. The Glenfiddich Spirit of Scotland Awards were annual awards given to notable Scottish people. Glenfiddich sponsored the event, in association with The Scotsman newspaper. Nine awards were distributed for art, business, environment, food, music, screen, sport, writing and \"Top Scot\". A consulting panel nominated four people in each category, with the winner decided by a public vote. The \"Top Scot\" is an open award, with the public able to nominate anyone. The awards haven't been hosted since 2014.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "729782", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=729782", "title": "Gingerbread", "text": "Gingerbread\n\nGingerbread refers to a broad category of baked goods, typically flavored with ginger, cloves, nutmeg or cinnamon and sweetened with honey, sugar or molasses. Gingerbread foods vary, ranging from a soft, moist loaf cake to something close to a ginger snap.\n\nOriginally, the term \"gingerbread\" (from Latin \"zingiber\" via Old French \"gingebras\") referred to preserved ginger. It then referred to a confection made with honey and spices. \"Gingerbread\" is often used to translate the French term \"pain d'épices\" (literally \"spice bread\") or the German terms Pfefferkuchen (lit. \"pepper cake\") or Lebkuchen (of unclear etymology).\n\nGingerbread is claimed to have been brought to Europe in 992 CE by the Armenian monk Gregory of Nicopolis (also called Gregory Makar and Grégoire de Nicopolis). He left Nicopolis (in modern-day western Greece) to live in Bondaroy (north-central France), near the town of Pithiviers. He stayed there for seven years and taught gingerbread baking to French Christians. He died in 999.\n\nIn the 13th century, gingerbread was brought to Sweden by German immigrants. In 15th-century Germany, a gingerbread guild controlled production. Early references from the Vadstena Abbey show that the Swedish nuns baked gingerbread to ease indigestion in 1444. It was the custom to bake white biscuits and paint them as window decorations.\n\nThe first documented trade of gingerbread biscuits dates to the 17th century, where they were sold in monasteries, pharmacies, and town square farmers' markets. In Medieval England gingerbread was thought to have medicinal properties. One hundred years later, the town of Market Drayton in Shropshire, England became known for its gingerbread, as is proudly displayed on their town's welcome sign, stating that it is the \"home of gingerbread\". The first recorded mention of gingerbread being baked in the town dates to 1793, although it was probably made earlier, as ginger had been stocked in high street businesses since the 1640s. Gingerbread became widely available in the 18th century.\n\nGingerbread came to the Americas with settlers from Europe. Molasses, which was less expensive than sugar, soon became a common ingredient and produced a softer cake. The first American cookbook, \"American Cookery\" by Amelia Simmons published in 1796, contained seven different recipes for gingerbread.\n\nIn England, gingerbread may refer to a cake, or type of cookie or biscuit made with ginger. In the biscuit form, it commonly takes the form of a gingerbread man. Gingerbread men were first attributed to the court of Queen Elizabeth I, who served the figurines to foreign dignitaries. Today, however, they are generally served around Christmas. Gingerbread was a traditional confectionery sold at popular fairs , often given as a treat or token of affection to children and lovers \"sweethearts\" and known as a \"fairing\" of gingerbread - the name retained now only by Cornish fairings. This crisp brittle type of gingerbread is now represented by the very popular commercial version called the ginger nut biscuit.\n\nParkin is a form of soft gingerbread cake made with oatmeal and treacle which is popular in northern England.\n\nIn the United States, this form of gingerbread is sometimes called \"gingerbread cake\" or \"ginger cake\" to distinguish it from the harder forms. French pain d'épices is somewhat similar, though generally slightly drier, and involves honey rather than treacle. Originally French \"pain d'épices\" did not contain ginger.\n\nIn the Netherlands and Belgium, a soft and crumbly gingerbread called \"peperkoek\", \"kruidkoek\" or \"ontbijtkoek\" is popularly served at breakfast time or during the day, thickly sliced and often topped with butter.\n\nIn Germany gingerbread is made in two forms: a soft form called Lebkuchen and a harder form, particularly associated with carnivals and street markets such as the Christmas markets that occur in many German towns. The hard gingerbread is made in decorative shapes, which are then further decorated with sweets and icing. The tradition of cutting gingerbread into shapes takes many other forms, and exists in many countries, a well-known example being the gingerbread man. Traditionally, these were dunked in port wine.\n\nIn Ashkenazi Jewish cuisine, the honey cake eaten at Rosh Hashanah (New Year) closely resembles the Dutch \"peperkoek\" or the German \"Lebkuchen\", though it has wide regional variations.\n\nIn the Nordic countries, the most popular form of ginger confection is the \"pepperkaker\" (Norwegian), \"pepparkakor\" (Swedish), \"brunkager\" (Danish), \"piparkökur\" (Icelandic), \"piparkakut\" (Finnish) and \"piparkūkas\" (Latvian) or \"piparkoogid\" (Estonian). They are thin, brittle biscuits that are particularly associated with the extended Christmas period. In Norway and Sweden, pepperkaker/pepparkakor are also used as window decorations (the pepperkaker/pepparkakor are a little thicker than usual and are decorated with glaze and candy). Many families bake pepperkaker/pepparkakor/brunkager as a tradition.\n\nIn Switzerland, a gingerbread confection known as \"biber\" is typically a two-centimeter (approximately ¾ of an inch) thick rectangular gingerbread cake with a marzipan filling. The cantons of Appenzell and St. Gallen are famous for biber, and are artfully adorned with images of the Appenzell bear or the St. Gallen cathedral respectively by engraving or icing.\n\nIn Russia, a gingerbread maker was first mentioned in Kazan cadastres in 1568. Gingerbread confections are called \"pryaniki\" (sg. \"pryanik\"), derived from the old Russian term for 'spices'. Historically three main centers of gingerbread production have developed in the cities of Vyazma, Gorodets, and Tula. Gingerbreads from Tver, Saint Petersburg and Moscow were also well known in the Russian Empire. A classic Russian gingerbread is made with rye flour, honey, sugar, butter, eggs and various spices; it has an embossed ornament and/or text on the front side with royal icing. A Russian gingerbread can also be shaped in various forms and stuffed with varenje and other sweet fillings.\n\nIn Poland, gingerbreads are known as \"pierniki\" (singular: piernik). Some cities have traditional regional styles. Toruń gingerbread (\"piernik toruński\") is a traditional Polish gingerbread that has been produced since the Middle Ages in the city of Toruń. It was a favorite delicacy of Chopin when he visited his godfather, Fryderyk Florian Skarbek, in Toruń during a school vacation. Kraków gingerbread is the traditional style from the former Polish capital.\n\nIn Czech Republic pardubický perník is known. \n\nIn Romania, gingerbread is called \"turtă dulce\" and usually has sugar glazing.\n\nA variety of gingerbread in Bulgaria is known as \"меденка\" (\"made of honey\"). Traditionally the cookie is as big as the palm of a hand, round and flat, and with a thin layer of chocolate. Other common ingredients include honey, cinnamon, ginger and dried clove.\n\nGingerbread is popular in England, and is available in supermarkets. As in other countries, gingerbread biscuits are often decorated with royal icing.\n\nIn Panama, a confection named \"yiyinbre\" is a gingerbread cake made with ginger and molasses; it is typical of the region of Chiriquí. Another popular confection is \"quequi\" or \"queque\", a chewy biscuit made with ginger, molasses and coconut.\n\n"}
{"id": "732066", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=732066", "title": "Sprinkles", "text": "Sprinkles\n\nSprinkles, sugar strands, or hundreds and thousands, are very small pieces of confectionery used as a decoration or to add texture to desserts such as cupcakes, doughnuts or ice cream. The tiny candies are produced in a variety of colors and are generally used as a topping or a decorative element.\n\nPopular terminology for this confection tends to overlap, while manufacturers are more precise with their labeling. What consumers often call \"sprinkles\" covers several types of candy decorations that are \"sprinkled\" randomly over a surface, as opposed to decorations that are placed in specific spots. Nonpareils, confetti, silver, gold, and pearl dragées – not to be confused with pearl sugar (which is also sprinkled on baked goods) – and \"hundreds-and-thousands\" are all used this way, along with a newer product called \"sugar shapes\" or \"sequins\". These latter come in a variety of shapes, often flavored, for holidays or themes, such as Halloween witches and pumpkins, or flowers and dinosaurs. Candy cane shapes may taste like peppermint, and gingerbread men like gingerbread cookies.\n\n\"Sanding sugar\" is a transparent crystal sugar of larger size than general-use refined white sugar. \"Crystal sugar\" tends to be clear and of much larger crystals than sanding sugar. \"Pearl sugar\" is relatively large, opaque white spheroids of sugar. Both crystal and pearl sugars are typically used for sprinkling on sweet breads, pastries, and cookies in many countries.\n\nSome American manufacturers deem the elongated opaque sprinkles the official sprinkles. In British English, these are \"sugar strands\" or \"hundreds-and-thousands\" (the latter term alludes to their supposed uncountability). In the Northeastern United States, sprinkles are often referred to as jimmies. \"Jimmies\", in this sense, are usually considered to be used as an ice cream topping, while sprinkles are for decorating baked goods, but the term can be used for both.\n\nThe sprinkles known as \"nonpareils\" in French and American English are tiny opaque spheres that were traditionally white, but that now come in many colors. The sprinkle-type of \"dragée\" is like a large nonpareil with a metallic coating of silver, gold, copper, or bronze. The food-sprinkle dragée is now also made in a form resembling pearls.\n\nToppings that are more similar in consistency to another type of candy, even if used similarly to sprinkles, are usually known by a variation of that candy's name—for example, mini-chocolate chips or praline.\n\nNonpareils date back at least to the late 18th-century, if not earlier. They were used as decoration for pièces montées and desserts.\n\nThe candy company Just Born cites its founder, Sam Born, as inventing the \"chocolate\" sprinkles called \"jimmies\" (which may never have contained any chocolate) in Brooklyn, New York.\n\nDutch \"hagelslag\" (sprinkles) were invented in 1913 by Erven H. de Jong from Wormerveer. Venz, another Dutch company made hagelslag popular. \"Hagelslag\" is used on bread. Most of the time butter is spread out so the \"hagelslag\" does not fall off. After much research and venture, de Vries and Venz created the first machine to produce the tiny cylindrical treats. They were named \"hagelslag\" after their resemblance to a weather phenomenon prominent in the Netherlands: hail. Only \"hagelslag\" with a cacao percentage of more than 32% can bear the name \"chocoladehagelslag\" (chocolate sprinkles). If the percentage is under the 32%, it has to be called \"cacaofantasie\" or \"cacaofantasie hagelslag\" (cacao fantasy sprinkles).\n\nSanding sugar has been commercially available in a small range of colors for decades. Now it comes in a wide variety, including black and metallic-like \"glitter\".\n\nJimmies is the most popular term for sprinkles in the Philadelphia and Boston regions. The origin of the name \"jimmies\" is uncertain, but it was first documented in 1930, as a topping for cake.\n\nThough the Just Born Candy Company of Bethlehem, PA claims to have invented jimmies and named them after an employee, this is unlikely. The rumor that the name somehow refers to Jim Crow is also likely false.\n\nAnother story attributes the name \"jimmies\" to Dr. Sidney Farber and Edward Brigham. Dr. Farber co-founded the Dana–Farber Cancer Institute in Boston, Massachusetts as well as a charity named after one of his child patients, The Jimmy Fund. Edward Brigham opened an ice cream restaurant called Brigham’s and charged an extra penny for chocolate sprinkles on a cone, which benefited The Jimmy Fund. The fund however was started in 1948, well after the first historical reference.\n\nSprinkles generally require frosting, ice cream, or some other sort of sticky material in order to stick to the desired food surface. They can be most commonly found on smaller confections such as cupcakes or frosted sugar cookies, as these generally have more frosting and smaller diameter than do cakes.\n\nIn the Netherlands, \"chocoladehagelslag\" (chocolate sprinkles) is used as a sandwich topping (similar to muisjes and vlokken); this is also common in Belgium, Suriname, and Indonesia, once colonies of the Netherlands. These countries also use \"vruchtenhagel\" and \"anijshagel\" (made of sugar and fruit/anise-flavour respectively) on sandwiches (mainly at breakfast). In Indonesia, it is commonly known as \"meses\" or \"meises\", presumably derived from the Dutch word of \"muisjes\". In Belgium it is often called \"muizenstrontjes\" (mouse excrement) due to the resemblance with mouse excrement.\n\nFairy bread is the name given to the children's treat of sprinkles or nonpareils on buttered white bread. Fairy bread is commonly served at children's parties in Australia and New Zealand.\n\nA dessert called \"confetti cake\" has sprinkles mixed with the batter, where they slowly dissolve and form little colored spots, giving the appearance of confetti. Confetti cakes are popular for children's birthdays in the United States. The Pillsbury Company sells its own variation known as \"Funfetti\" cake, incorporating a sprinkle-like substance into the mix.\n\n"}
{"id": "733584", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=733584", "title": "Tartiflette", "text": "Tartiflette\n\nTartiflette () is a dish from Savoy in the Alps. It is made with potatoes, reblochon cheese, lardons and onions.\n\nThe word \"tartiflette\" is probably derived from the Arpitan word for \"potato\", \"tartiflâ\".\nThis modern recipe was inspired by a truly traditional dish called \"péla\": a gratin of potatoes and onions (without cheese) in a long-handled pan called a pelagic (shovel) in the Provence region of France. It was developed in the 1980s by the Union Interprofessional Reblochon to promote sales of reblochon, as is confirmed also by Christian Millau (of the Gault-Millau Guide) in his gastronomic dictionary.\n\nTartiflette was first mentioned in a 1705 book, \"Le Cuisinier Royal et Bourgeois\", written by François Massialot and his assistant cook B. Mathieu.\n\nThe name derives from the Savoyard word for potatoes, \"tartifles\", a term also found in Provençal. As with many traditional dishes in the region, the potato is a staple ingredient. Savoy was historically part of the Holy Roman Empire and were exposed to potato tubers earlier than the French. The Savoyards first heard of tartiflette when it began to appear on the menus of restaurants in the ski stations, conveying an image of authenticity and mountain terroir.\n\nA common related preparation found throughout the region is the \"Croziflette\". The format of this adheres to that of the original dish in everything but the use of potatoes, in place of which are found minuscule squares of locally produced pasta, crozets de Savoie (usually made from buckwheat but sometimes durum). The name of this dish is a blend of \"crozet\" and \"tartiflette\".\n"}
{"id": "734489", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=734489", "title": "Homecoming", "text": "Homecoming\n\nHomecoming is the tradition of welcoming back former students and members and celebrating an organization's existence. It is a tradition in many high schools, colleges, and churches in the United States and Canada.\n\nHomecoming is an annual tradition in the United States. People, towns, high schools, and colleges come together, usually in late September or early October, to welcome back alumni, alumnae and former residents. It is built around a central event, such as a banquet or dance and, most often, a game of American football, or, on occasion, basketball, ice hockey, or soccer. When celebrated by schools, the activities vary widely. However, they usually consist of a football game played on a school's home football field, activities for students and alumni, a parade featuring the school's choir, marching band, and sports teams, and the coronation of a homecoming queen (and at many schools, a homecoming king). A dance commonly follows the game or the day following the game. When attached to a football game, homecoming traditionally occurs on the team's return from the longest road trip of the season. The game itself, whether it be football or another sport, will typically feature the home team playing a considerably weaker opponent. The game is supposed to be an \"easy win\" and thus weaker schools will sometimes play lower division schools.\n\nThe tradition of homecoming has its origin in alumni football games held at colleges and universities since the 19th century. Many schools including Baylor, Southwestern, Illinois, and Missouri have made claims that they held the first modern homecoming. The NCAA, \"Trivial Pursuit\", \"Jeopardy!\", and references from the American TV drama \"NCIS\" give the title to the University of Missouri's 1911 football game during which alumni were encouraged to attend. It was the first annual homecoming centered on a parade and a football game.\n\nIn 1891, the Missouri Tigers first faced off against the Kansas Jayhawks in the first installment of the Border War, which was also the oldest college football rivalry west of the Mississippi River until the teams stopped playing each other in 2012. The intense rivalry originally took place at neutral sites, usually in Kansas City, Missouri, until a new conference regulation was announced that required intercollegiate football games to be played on collegiate campuses. To renew excitement in the rivalry, ensure adequate attendance at the new location, and celebrate the first meeting of the two teams on the Mizzou campus in Columbia, Missouri, Mizzou Athletic Director Chester Brewer invited all alumni to \"come home\" for the game in 1911. Along with the football game, the celebration included a parade and spirit rally with bonfire. The event was a success, with nearly 10,000 alumni coming home to take part in the celebration and watch the Tigers and Jayhawks play to a 3–3 tie. The Missouri annual homecoming, with its parade and spirit rally centered on a large football game is the model that has gone on to take hold at colleges and high schools across the United States.\n\nAt least two collegiate homecoming celebrations predate the University of Missouri football game homecoming event: Southwestern University, in Georgetown, TX and Baylor University, in Waco, TX. By multiple historical accounts, Southwestern held the first homecoming on record on Wednesday, April 21, 1909 in San Gabriel Park. Former students raised funds, provided homes, prepared and served a barbecue supper, and decorated the town buildings. Members of the senior class waited tables.\n\nNorthern Illinois University has one of the longest-celebrated homecoming traditions in the country. The alumni football game played on Oct. 10, 1903, began NIU's homecoming tradition.\n\nBaylor's homecoming history dates back to November 1909 and included a parade, reunion parties, and an afternoon football game (the final game of the 1909 season), a tradition that continued and celebrated its 100th anniversary in 2009. There was a gap between 1910 and 1915 when there was no homecoming event, however there has been continuity since 1915. \n\nThe University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign first held its homecoming event in 1910, celebrating the 100th anniversary in 2010. This event was held annually except for 1918, when it was cancelled because of the influenza epidemic.\n\nThe homecoming court is a representative group of students that, in a coeducational institution, consists of a king and queen, and possibly prince(s) and princess(es). In a single-sex institution, the homecoming court will usually consist of only a king and a prince (for an all-male school) or a queen and a princess (for an all-female school), although some schools may choose to join with single-gender schools of the other gender to elect the homecoming court jointly.\n\nGenerally, the king and queen are students completing their final years of study at their school (also called “seniors”), while the prince and princess are underclassmen, often with a prince/princess for each grade. Recently, some high schools have chosen to add categories, such as duke and duchess, to extend the representation of students to include a category in which students with special needs are elected. In high school, 17- or 18-year-old students in their final year are represented by a king or queen; in college, students who are completing their final year of study, usually between 21 and 23 years old.\n\nLocal rules determine when the homecoming king and queen are crowned. Sometimes, the big announcement comes at a pep rally, school assembly, or public ceremony one or more days before the football game. Other schools crown their royalty at the homecoming football game, a dance, or other school event.\n\nOften, the previous year's king and queen are invited back to crown their successors. If they are absent for whatever reason, someone else—usually, another previous king or queen, a popular teacher, or other designated person—will perform those duties. Usually, the queen is crowned first, followed by the king. The crowning method also varies by school.\n\nHomecoming court members who are not crowned king or queen are often called escorts or royalty. They are often expected to participate in the week's activities as well. At some schools, a homecoming prince/princess, duke/duchess, etc. (often underclassmen nominated by their classmates) are crowned along with the king and queen; sometimes, middle school and junior high students may partake in the high school activities.\nClassmates traditionally nominate students who have done a lot to contribute to their school, then students vote for members of the court from the nominees. Once the homecoming court candidates are announced, the entire student body votes for the queen and king. The voting is often conducted by secret ballot, but other methods may also be used by certain schools.\n\nMany homecoming celebrations include a parade. Students often select the grand marshal based on a history of service and support to the school and community. The parade includes the school's marching band and different school organizations’ floats created by the classes and organizations and most of the sports get a chance to be in the parade. Every class prepares a float which corresponds with the homecoming theme or related theme of school spirit as assign by school administrators. In addition, the homecoming court takes part in the parade, often riding together in one or more convertibles as part of the parade. Community civic organizations and businesses, area fire departments, and alumni groups often participate as well. The parade is often part of a series of activities scheduled for that specific day, which can also include a pep rally, bonfire, snake dance, and other activities for students and alumni.\n\nAt most major colleges and universities, the football game and preceding tailgate party are the most widely recognized and heavily attended events of the week. Alumni gather from all around the world to return to their alma mater, reconnect with one another, and take part in the festivities. Students, alumni, businesses, and members of the community set up tents in parking lots, fields, and streets near the stadium to cook food, play games, socialize, binge drink, and even enjoy live music in many instances. These celebrations often last straight through the game for those who do not have tickets but still come to take part in the socializing and excitement of the homecoming atmosphere. Most tents even include television or radio feeds of the game for those without tickets.\n\nSometimes during the school week, a picnic can occur. The picnic is very similar to the tailgate party, but it occurs after school or during the school's lunch period.\n\nThroughout the week, many schools (particularly high schools) engage in special dress-up days, sometimes called \"Spirit Week\", where students are allowed to wear clothing suitable to the theme (e.g., 1980s day, toga day, roll out of bed day, cowboy day, nerd day, pirate day, meme day, Rat Pack Day, flannel Friday, What-not-to-wear Wednesday) leading to the homecoming. Students traditionally wear clothing with their school's name, or clothing and makeup of their school's colors on Friday.\n\nMany schools hold a rally during homecoming week, often one or more nights before the game. The events vary, but may include skits, games, introduction of the homecoming court (and coronation of the king and queen if that is the school's tradition), and comments from the football players or coach about the upcoming game.\n\nAt some schools, the homecoming rally ends with a bonfire (in which old wood structures, the rival school's memorabilia and other items are burned in a controlled fire.) Many colleges and high schools no longer hold bonfires because of accidents that have occurred surrounding these events in the past. The most well known accident took place in 1999, when 12 students were killed and 27 others were injured at Texas A&M University when a pile of logs that had been assembled for a bonfire collapsed. However, this incident was not associated with homecoming—A&M is one of the few schools that does not organize a homecoming, although it has many unique traditions. The bonfire was associated with the annual rivalry game between A&M and the University of Texas.\n\nThe alumni band consists of former college and university band members who return for homecoming to perform with the current marching band (usually made up from recent graduates to members who graduated years or decades before) either during halftime as a full band or a featured section, e.g. the trumpet section or the tubas and drumline squads, as well as performing with the current band during the post game concert.\n\nThe homecoming dance—usually the culminating event of the week (for high schools)—is a formal or informal event, either at the school or an off-campus location. The venue is decorated, and either a disc jockey or band is hired to play music. In many ways, it is a fall prom. Homecoming dances could be informal as well just like standard school dances. At high schools, the homecoming dances are sometimes held in the high school gymnasium or outside in a large field. Homecoming dance attire is less formal than prom. Females generally wear knee length dresses with their hair down, and males generally wear a tucked in dress shirt with pants. At prom, females generally wear a more formal gown that goes to the ground with hair up, and males wear suits and tuxedos.\n\nSince most colleges are too large to facilitate a campus-wide dance, these events are usually handled instead by student organizations such as fraternities, sororities, and residential colleges. Because football and alumni events are the focal points of collegiate homecoming, dances often take place during a different week when schedules are more permitting, or not at all.\n\nAt the high school level, students generally compete by grade level in events such as the spirit days, parade floats, and powder puff football. The competition at the collegiate level is mainly between Greek-letter organizations and, to a lesser degree, residence halls. At most larger schools, fraternities and sororities compete on parade floats, house decorations, skits, talent competitions, and even service events such as blood drives or food drives. Sometimes on coronation night, some schools have games that they play between classes. Such events include the pyramid, the 3 legged race, the pop chug, and tug of war.\n\nWhile most schools schedule their homecoming activities around football, smaller schools that do not field a football team may plan the annual event at another time of the year. In these instances, basketball, ice hockey or soccer serves as the \"big game\" for students and alumni. Often in smaller towns with smaller populations, the parade is omitted.\n\nAt schools without athletic programs, the centerpiece event is usually a banquet, where alumni are recognized. This format is also used for alumni events of high schools that have either closed or consolidated with other high schools; the high school classes continue to meet and celebrate their years at their now-defunct alma mater. In other cases, alumni of closed schools will participate with the consolidated school's homecoming, where special recognition is often given for alumni of the once-separate schools.\n\nIn some parts of the country, high school basketball has gained a homecoming celebration of its own. Often referred to as \"winter homecoming\", \"hoopcoming\", \"coronation\", \"snowcoming\", \"Colors Day,\" or c\"ourtwarming\" (the latter is especially prominent in parts of Missouri), it usually includes rallies, dress-up days, special dinners, king and queen coronations, and other winter-friendly activities typically associated with football homecoming.\n\nCanadian homecoming weekends are often centred on a football game.\n\nIn Newfoundland and Labrador, communities have a \"Come Home Year\" where people who have moved away from their town come back from across Canada. In 2000, there was a provincial \"Come Home Year\", where many people came back to visit their various communities.\n\nHomecomings largely only exist among high schools in eastern Canada, and are uncommon at that. Newmarket High School, London South Collegiate Institute, Banting Memorial High School and Earl Haig Secondary School are examples of known schools in Ontario to arrange homecomings. Upper Canada College also has a longstanding homecoming tradition, although the event is referred to as \"A-Day\" (Association Day).\n\nThe term \"homecoming\" can also refer to the special services conducted by some religious congregations, particularly by many smaller American Protestant churches, to celebrate church heritage and welcome back former members or pastors. They are often held annually, but are sometimes held as one-time-only events, to celebrate the occasion.\n\n"}
{"id": "735061", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=735061", "title": "Cracovia (vodka)", "text": "Cracovia (vodka)\n\nCracovia is Polish brand of vodka produced by distillery Polmos Kraków since 1995.\nThere are three varieties of this vodka:\n\n"}
{"id": "735297", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=735297", "title": "Keebler Company", "text": "Keebler Company\n\nThe Keebler Company is the second largest cookie and cracker manufacturer in the United States. Founded in 1853, it has produced numerous baked snacks. Keebler has marketed its brands such as Cheez-It (which have the Sunshine Biscuits brand), Chips Deluxe, Club Crackers, E.L. Fudge Cookies, Famous Amos, Fudge Shoppe Cookies, Murray cookies, Austin, Plantation, Vienna Fingers, Town House Crackers, Wheatables, Sandie's Shortbread, Chachos and Zesta Crackers, among others.\nThe Keebler slogans are \"\"Uncommonly Good\"\" and \"a little elfin magic goes a long way\". Tom Shutter and Leo Burnett wrote the familiar jingle.\n\nGodfrey Keebler, of German descent, opened a bakery in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, in 1853. His bakery networked with several other local bakeries around the country over the years, and in 1927 they merged into the United Biscuit Company of America.\n\nUnited Biscuit operated regional bakeries which included not only Keebler, but also Hekman Biscuit Company of Grand Rapids, Michigan, the Strietmann Biscuit Company of Mariemont, Ohio and the Bowman Biscuit Company of Denver which used the Supreme brand name. By 1963, United Biscuit introduced the Kitchen Rich brand nationally while still utilizing the regional brand names. In 1966, United Biscuit decided to adopt a uniform brand name and chose Keebler as the national brand and the name of the company. Keebler did adopt Streitmann's Zesta saltine brand as Keebler's national brand of saltine crackers.\n\nKeebler-Weyl Bakery became the official baker of Girl Scout Cookies in 1936, the first commercial company to bake the cookies (the scouts and their mothers had done it previously). By 1978, four companies were producing the cookies. Little Brownie Bakers is the Keebler division still licensed to produce the cookies.\n\nKeebler was acquired by United Biscuits in 1974, headquartered in West Drayton, Middlesex, England. In 1995, United Biscuits sold Keebler to a partnership between Flowers Industries and Artal Luxembourg, a private equity firm. Artal Luxembourg sold its holdings in Keebler in an IPO in 1998.\n\nIn 2000, the Keebler Company acquired a license to produce snacks based on the popular children's show Sesame Street.\n\nIn March 2001, The Keebler Company was acquired by the Kellogg Company. At that time, headquarters were located in Elmhurst, Illinois. Currently, Keebler has manufacturing plants in the United States, Thailand, Indonesia, and Malaysia.\n\nThe animated Keebler Elves, led by \"Ernest J. 'Ernie' Keebler\", rank among the best-known characters from commercials . Ernest is the head elf and the most friendly of the bunch. He runs the workshop with an iron fist. The elves have appeared in countless television advertisements throughout the years, shown baking their unique products. In the commercials, The Keebler tree logo is often turned into the tree in which the elves reside.\n\nLeo Burnett Worldwide, an advertising agency, created the elves in 1968, calling the bakery \"The Hollow Tree Factory.\"\n\nJ.J. Keebler was the original \"king elf\" in 1969, and was featured in a classroom film about how animated commercials are made, \"Show and Sell,\" with J.J.'s voice performed by Alan Reed Sr. Ernie Keebler became \"head elf\" in 1970. White-haired Ernie wears a green jacket, a white shirt with a yellow tie, a red vest, and floppy shoes.\n\nErnie Keebler was first voiced by Walker Edmiston, later by Parley Baer, and then Andre Stojka.\n\nOther elves were Fryer Tuck (who promoted \"Munch-ems\"), Ernie's nephews Zoot and J.J. (known for Pizzarias Pizza Chips), Ernie's mother Ma Keebler, young Elmer Keebler, Buckets (who threw fudge on the cookies), Fast Eddie (who wrapped the products), Sam (the peanut butter baker), Roger (the jeweler), Doc (the doctor and cookie maker), Zack (the fudge shoppe supervisor), Flo (the accountant), Leonardo (the artist), Elwood (who ran through the dough), Professor, Edison, Larry and Art.\nMany of the Keebler commercials were narrated by the announcer Danny Dark. The first Keebler elves were drawn by children's author/illustrator and commercial artist Roger Bradfield.\n\nExamples of Keebler products include: \n"}
{"id": "737839", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=737839", "title": "Exotic baryon", "text": "Exotic baryon\n\nExotic baryons are a type of hadron (bound states of quarks and gluons) with half-integer spin, but have a quark content different to the three quarks (\"qqq\") present in conventional baryons. An example would be pentaquarks, consisting of four quarks and one antiquark (\"qqqqq̅\").\n\nSo far, the only observed exotic baryons are the pentaquarks and , discovered in 2015 by the LHCb collaboration.\n\nSeveral types of exotic baryons that require physics beyond the Standard Model have been conjectured in order to explain specific experimental anomalies. There is no independent experimental evidence for any of these particles. One example is supersymmetric R-baryons, which are bound states of 3 quarks and a gluino. The lightest R-baryon is denoted as S and consists of an up quark, a down quark, a strange quark and a gluino. This particle is expected to be long lived or stable and has been invoked to explain ultra-high-energy cosmic rays. Stable exotic baryons are also candidates for strongly interacting dark matter.\nIt has been speculated by futurologist Ray Kurzweil that by the end of the 21st century it might be possible by using femtotechnology to create new chemical elements composed of exotic baryons that would eventually constitute a new periodic table of elements in which the elements would have completely different properties than the regular chemical elements.\n"}
{"id": "738173", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=738173", "title": "Red bean cake", "text": "Red bean cake\n\nRed bean cake is a type of Cantonese cake with a sweet red bean paste filling. It is made primarily with azuki beans.\n\nCantonese-style red bean cake is made with hardened red bean paste that has been frozen. The cake is sweetened and sprinkled with sesames. It is generally tough to bite, and is served as a square block. Depending on the particular region within China, this may be seen as a year-round snack, or as a seasonal pastry consumed on certain traditional Chinese holidays.\n\n"}
{"id": "738229", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=738229", "title": "Migdol", "text": "Migdol\n\nMigdol, or migdal, is a Hebrew word (מגדּלה מגדּל, מגדּל מגדּול) which means either a tower (from its size or height), an elevated stage (a rostrum or pulpit), or a raised bed (within a river). Physically, it can mean fortified land, i.e. a walled city or castle; or elevated land, as in a raised bed, like a platform, possibly a lookout. The term for a border fort is similar, \"mekter\", in Egyptian. Figuratively, \"tower\" has connotations of proud authority.\n\nThe Book of Exodus records that the children of Israel encamped at Pi-hahiroth between Migdol and the Red Sea, before their crossing.\n\nJoshua referred to Migdal-Gad, ‘tower of Gad’, one of the fortified cities of Judah, and also to Migdal-El, ‘tower of God’, one of the fortified towns of Naphtali () and the city of origin of Mary Magdelene (Magdala) (; ; and ). \n\nJeremiah referred to a \"Migdol\" in Egypt, () an island in the Nile, and Ezekiel referred to the Migdol of Syene, in Upper Egypt, in the context of the seat of government. The letters of Šuta refer to a \"Magdalu in Egypt\" which Albright identified with Jeremiah's Migdol. \n\nMigdal Ha'emek is a large hill surrounded by the Kishon river, west of Nazareth.\n"}
{"id": "738934", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=738934", "title": "Raejuusto", "text": "Raejuusto\n\nRaejuusto (Trans. \"Granular Cheese\" also known as grynost by the Swedish speaking Finns) is a Finnish fresh cheese that is rather similar to cottage cheese. In Sweden, raejuusto-type cheese is known as keso, and in Denmark as hytteost. Raejuusto is made from cow's milk.\n\nRaejuusto has a low fat content, similar to cottage cheese and a high protein content. It can be enjoyed on its own or together with, for instance, cucumber, olive oil and ground black pepper. Raejuusto is also often used to garnish soups and other dishes.\n\n"}
{"id": "740373", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=740373", "title": "Gianduiotto", "text": "Gianduiotto\n\nThe gianduiotto (; ) is chocolate originally from Piedmont, in northern Italy, they are shaped as ingots. Gianduiotti are individually wrapped in a tinfoil cover, usually gold or silver-colored. It is the speciality of Turin, and takes its name from \"gianduja\", the preparation of chocolate that is used for gianduiotti and other sweets (including Nutella and bicerin di Gianduiotto); in turn, this preparation is named after Gianduja, a mask in commedia dell'arte that represents the archetypal Piedmontese. Indeed, Gianduja's hat inspired the shape of the gianduiotto.\n\nGianduiotti are produced from a paste of sugar, cocoa and hazelnut \"Tonda Gentile delle Langhe\". The official “birth” of gianduiotti is set at 1865 in Turin, by Pierre Paul Caffarel and Michele Prochet, the first to completely grind hazelnuts to a paste before adding them to the cocoa and sugar mix.\n\nApparently, the idea of mixing hazelnut pieces to “standard” chocolates was born during Napoleon’s reign, when importing cocoa from South America became difficult. “Raw” cocoa was expensive, so local producers started incorporating bits of roasted hazelnuts (hazelnuts are locally grown and were easy to come by in Piedmont) to make the final product more affordable.\n"}
{"id": "741168", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=741168", "title": "White Knight (chocolate)", "text": "White Knight (chocolate)\n\nA White Knight is a chocolate-coated, chewy, mint-flavoured confectionery bar sold in Australia. It is manufactured by Nestlé Australia. The packaging is blue and white and features a picture of a knight on a horse. Its slogan is 'Mighty Mint Chew'.\n\nThe 25 gram bar is composed of a white, mint flavoured chewy center coated in compound chocolate.\n\nIn the 1980s the bar used to lie on top of a piece of cardboard within the wrapper. On the reverse of the card was a picture of a fictional knight which could be bent at the base to stand up. Children would aim to trade and collect the set of these knights. This part of the packaging was discontinued years later, presumably as a cost-cutting measure.\n\nIt was once sold across all major Australian supermarkets as well as some discount department stores (e.g. Kmart) and milk bars/convenience stores but as of 2014 was stocked only at Woolworths and Coles supermarkets and some specialty confectionery stores. The 25g bar was sold at a cheaper price point reflecting its smaller size (e.g. 75c in 2008) but in early 2010 its price was raised similar to the larger (50–60 g) sized chocolate bars (90c at Coles/Woolworths/Kmart). \n\nThe production of White Knight was discontinued by Nestlé Australia around 2016.\n\nIngredients: Sugar, glucose syrup (derived from wheat or corn), vegetable fat, milk solids, cocoa, gelatine, emulsifiers (soya lecithin, 492) peppermint oil, salt, flavours, colour (133)\n\nNutritional information:\nServing size: 25 g (one bar)\n\n\"Average quantity per serving\":\nEnergy 460 kJ, protein 0.5 g, fat (total) 3.1 g (saturated fat 2.9 g), carbohydrate 19.7 g (sugars 15.1 g), sodium 10 mg.\n\n\"Average quantity per 100 g (Shown as per Australian food labelling standard)\":\nEnergy 1830 kJ, protein 1.9 g, fat (total) 12.2 g (saturated Fat 11.7 g), carbohydrate 78.7 g (sugars 60.4 g), sodium 40 mg.\n\n"}
{"id": "741170", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=741170", "title": "Metaphysical necessity", "text": "Metaphysical necessity\n\nIn philosophy, metaphysical necessity, sometimes called broad logical necessity, is one of many different kinds of necessity, which sits between logical necessity and nomological (or physical) necessity, in the sense that logical necessity entails metaphysical necessity, but not vice versa, and metaphysical necessity entails physical necessity, but not vice versa. A proposition is said to be \"necessary\" if it could not have failed to be the case. Nomological necessity is necessity according to the laws of physics and logical necessity is necessity according to the laws of logic, while metaphysical necessities are necessary in the sense that the world could not possibly have been otherwise. What facts are metaphysically necessary, and on what basis we might view certain facts as metaphysically but not logically necessary are subjects of substantial discussion in contemporary philosophy.\n\nThe concept of a metaphysically necessary being plays an important role in certain arguments for the existence of God, especially the ontological argument, but metaphysical necessity is also one of the central concepts in late 20th century analytic philosophy. Metaphysical necessity has proved a controversial concept, and criticized by David Hume, Immanuel Kant, J. L. Mackie, and Richard Swinburne, among others.\n\nMetaphysical necessity is contrasted with other types of necessity. For example, the philosophers of religion John Hick and William L. Rowe distinguished the following three:\nWhile many theologians (e.g. Anselm of Canterbury, René Descartes, and Gottfried Leibniz) considered God to be a logically or metaphysically necessary being, Richard Swinburne argued for factual necessity, and Alvin Plantinga argues that God is a causally necessary being. Because a factually or causally necessary being does not exist by logical necessity, it does not exist in all logically possible worlds. Therefore, Swinburne used the term \"ultimate brute fact\" for the existence of God.\n\nIn Naming and Necessity, Saul Kripke argued that there were a posteriori truths, such as Hesperus is Phosphoros, or Water is H₂O, that were nonetheless metaphysically necessary.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "741795", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=741795", "title": "Amoy Food", "text": "Amoy Food\n\nAmoy Food Limited (, abbr. ) is a cooking sauce and manufacturer of condiments in Hong Kong. Its products, which now include foodstuffs such as frozen foods and instant foods for heating in a microwave oven, are sold around the world. It is owned by CITIC Capital, a subsidiary of the CITIC Group.\n\nIts former factory site in Ngau Tau Kok was sold in the 1970s and has since been turned into an apartment complex called the Amoy Gardens. It was one of the hotzones of infection during the 2003 SARS Epidemic in Hong Kong.\n\nAmoy (廈門) is an English romanisation, based on the Min Nan pronunciation of the city in Fujian province, China known in Mandarin as Xiamen.\n\nIn 1908, Tao Fa, the predecessor of the company, was founded in Xiamen for producing soy sauce and soy milk.\n\nIn 1928, Amoy was set up in Hong Kong.\n\nIn a 1947 advertisement, the company was named as Amoy Canning Corporation, Ltd. () with factory in Ngau Tau Kok and the head office at Bonham Strand in Sheung Wan.\n\nIn 1977, Sime Darby group acquired 50% of Amoy Canning.\n\nIn 1980, Hang Lung Development acquired 63% of Amoy Canning Corp. (HK) Ltd\n\nIn 1983, fifty percent of the Amoy Food was acquired by Pillsbury.\n\nIn 1987, a manufacturing plant was set up in Tai Po Industrial Estate in Tai Po.\n\nIn 1988, it was reported to be the largest soy sauce maker in the area, producing 6,000 tonnes a year.\n\nIn 1991, Amoy became wholly owned by the French dairy products company Danone.\n\nOn 12 January 2006, Danone sold the company to Ajinomoto of Japan.\n\nIn 2013, Amoy frozen food's factory in China was moved to Tai Po Industrial Estate in Hong Kong.\n\nIn 2018, Ajinomoto sold the company to CITIC Group of China.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "743327", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=743327", "title": "Coconut milk", "text": "Coconut milk\n\nCoconut milk is the liquid that comes from the grated pulp of a mature coconut. The opacity and rich taste of coconut milk are due to its high oil content, most of which is saturated fat. Coconut milk is a traditional food ingredient used in Southeast Asia, South Asia, the Caribbean, and northern South America.\n\nCoconut milk is distinguished from coconut water by its thicker consistency and milkier appearance. Unlike coconut water, which is the liquid found directly inside a coconut, coconut milk is the result of crushing coconut pulp.\n\nCoconut milk is traditionally made by grating the white inner flesh of a brown coconut and mixing the shredded coconut pulp with a small amount of water in order to suspend the fat present in the grated pulp. The grating process can be carried out manually or by machine. \n\nCoconut milk has a fat content of up to 24%, depending on the fat level of the coconut pulp and the quantity of added water. Coconut milk exists in two grades: thick and thin. \"Thick\" coconut milk usually contains 20–22% fat while \"thin\" coconut milk usually contains 5–7% fat. Thick milk is prepared by directly squeezing grated coconut pulp through cheesecloth. Thin milk is produced by soaking the squeezed coconut pulp in water and further squeezing the pulp until a thinner liquid forms. Thick milk contains soluble, suspended solids, which makes it a good ingredient for desserts and rich and dry sauces. Because thin milk does not contain these soluble solids, it is mainly used in general cooking. The distinction between thick and thin milk is not usually made in Western nations due to the fact that fresh coconut milk is uncommon in these countries and most consumers buy coconut milk in cartons or cans.\n\nWhen refrigerated and left to set, coconut cream will rise to the top and separate out from the milk. To avoid this in commercial coconut milk, an emulsifier and a stabiliser have to be used.\n\nManufacturers of canned coconut milk typically combine diluted and comminuted milk with the addition of water as a filler. Depending on the brand and age of the milk itself, a thicker, more paste-like consistency floats to the top of the can and is sometimes separated and used in recipes that require coconut cream rather than coconut milk. Some brands sold in Western countries add thickening agents or emulsifiers to prevent the milk from separating inside the can.\n\nCoconut milk can used in both sweet and savory dishes. In many tropical and Asian cuisines it is a traditional ingredient in curries and other dishes, including desserts. Coconut rice is a rice cooked in coconut milk consumed in Southeastern Asia and the Caribbean. \"Nasi lemak\" is a Malaysian version of coconut rice, while the same dish is called \"nasi uduk\" in Indonesia. Coconut milk is also used throughout Asia for making traditional serabi, an Asian style pancake.\n\nIn Brazil, coconut milk is mostly used in northeastern cuisine, generally with seafood stews and desserts. In Colombia and Panama, the grated flesh of coconut and coconut milk are used to make sweet \"titoté\". In Venezuela, pulp dishes are prepared with coconut milk and shredded fish in a dish called \"mojito en coco\". Coconut milk is used to make traditional Venezuelan dishes such as \"majarete\", a typical Venezuelan dessert, and \"arroz con coco\", also known as coconut rice.\n\nIn Southeast Asia, coconut milk is used to make many traditional drinks. \"Cendol\" is a popular iced drink from this region containing chilled coconut milk and green jellies made of rice flour. Coconut milk is also used in hot drinks, such as \"bandrek\" and \"bajigur\", two popular drinks from Indonesia. Sweetened coconut milk and coconut milk diluted with water are two popular coconut beverages in southern China and Taiwan.\n\nThe jelly-like pulp from the inside of the coconut is often added to coconut water to make a tropical drink. In Brazil, for example, coconut milk is mixed with sugar and \"cachaça\" to make a cocktail called . Puerto Rico is also popular for tropical drinks containing coconut, such as \"piña colada\" and \"coquito\", which typically contain coconut milk or coconut cream.\n\nIn a 100 milliliter (g) portion, coconut milk contains 230 kilocalories and is 68% water, 24% total fat, 6% carbohydrates, and 2% protein (see table). The fat composition includes 21 grams of saturated fat, half of which is lauric acid.\n\nCoconut milk is a rich source (20% or more of the Daily Value, DV) of manganese (44% DV) and an adequate source (10–19% DV) of phosphorus, iron, and magnesium, with no other nutrients in significant content (see table).\n\nOne of the most prominent components of coconut milk is coconut oil, which many health organizations, such as the United States Food and Drug Administration, World Health Organization, International College of Nutrition, the United States Department of Health and Human Services, American Dietetic Association, American Heart Association, British National Health Service, and Dietitians of Canada, discourage people from consuming in significant amounts due to its high levels of saturated fat. Excessive coconut milk consumption can also raise blood levels of cholesterol due to the amount of lauric acid, a saturated fat that contributes to higher blood cholesterol by increasing the levels of high-density lipoprotein cholesterol.\n\nIn 1943, it was discovered that coconut milk could actively encourage plant growth. Although there are many factors that attribute coconut milk to plant growth, the main cause is the existence of a cytokinin known as zeatin found in coconut milk. While the zeatin in coconut milk speeds up plant growth in general, it does not speed up growth in certain plants such as radishes. However, when 10% coconut milk is added to the substrate in which wheat is grown, substantial improvements have been noted.\n\n"}
{"id": "744008", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=744008", "title": "Tandoori chicken", "text": "Tandoori chicken\n\nTandoori chicken is a chicken dish prepared by roasting chicken marinated in yoghurt and spices in a \"tandoor\", a cylindrical clay oven. The dish originated from the Indian subcontinent and is popular in many other parts of the world.\n\nDishes similar to tandoori chicken may have exited during the Harappan civilization. According to eminent archeologist and vice-chancellor of Deccan College Professor Vasant Shinde, the earliest evidence for a dish similar to tandoori chicken can be found in Harappan civilization and dates back to 3000 BCE. His team has found ancient ovens at Harappan sites which are similar to the tandoors so popular in the Punjab. Physical remains of chicken bones with char marks have also been unearthed. Sushruta samhita records meat being cooked in an oven (kandu) after marinating it in spices like black mustard (rai) powder and fragrant spices. According to Ahmed (2014), Harappan oven structures may have operated in a similar manner to the modern tandoors of the Punjab.\n\nTandoori chicken as a dish originated in the Punjab before the independence of India and Pakistan. In the late 1940s, tandoori chicken was popularised at Moti Mahal in Peshawar by Kundan Lal Jaggi, Thakur Dass, and Kundan Lal Gujral, who are all Punjabi Hindus as well as the founders of the Moti Mahal restaurant. Mokha Singh had founded the restaurant in the Peshawar area of British India, which is now Pakistan.\n\nIn the United States, tandoori chicken began appearing on menus by the 1960s. Jacqueline Kennedy was reported to have eaten \"chicken tandoori\" on a flight from Rome to Bombay in 1962. A recipe for tandoori chicken was printed in the \"Los Angeles Times\" in 1963, for \"the hostess in search of a fresh idea for a party dinner\"; a similar recipe was featured in the same newspaper in 1964.\n\nThe raw chicken is marinated in a mixture of dahi (yogurt) and \"tandoori masala\", a spice blend. It is seasoned and colored with cayenne pepper, red chili powder, or Kashmiri red chili powder as well as turmeric or food coloring. The skin is generally removed before the chicken is marinated and roasted.\n\nThe marinated chicken is placed on skewers and cooked at high temperatures in a tandoor oven, which is heated with charcoal or wood, which adds to the smoky flavour. The dish can also be cooked in a standard oven, using a spit or rotisserie, or over hot charcoal.\n\nThere is a range of tandoori recipes for whole grilled chicken, some of which are cooked in a tandoor and others over charcoal. These include \"Chirga\" (Roasted whole chicken); \"Tandoori Murgh\" (Roast whole chicken with almonds); \"Murgh Kabab Seekhi (\"Whole stuffed chicken on the spit); \"Kookarh Tandoori\" (Steamed chicken on spit); \"Tandoori Murgh Massaledarh\" (Whole spiced chicken on spit); and \"Murghi Bhogar\" (Chicken in the Bhogar style).\n\nTandoori chicken can be eaten as a starter or appetizer, or as a main course, often served with naan flatbread. It is also used as the base of numerous cream-based curries, such as butter chicken. Local varieties of tandoori chicken prepared from the rooyi posto in Bengal have appeared in local eateries, particularly those between Kolaghat and Kolkata. Tandoori chicken was popularized in post-independence India by Moti Mahal, Daryaganj in Delhi when it was served to the first Prime Minister of India, Jawaharlal Nehru. There, tandoori chicken became a standard offering at official banquets.\n\nThe fame of tandoori chicken led to many derivatives, such as chicken \"tikka\" (and eventually the Indian dish popularized in Britain, chicken \"tikka masala\"), commonly found in menus in Indian restaurants all over the world. Nearly all derivatives of tandoori chicken begin with a yogurt and citrus-based marinade. \n\n\n"}
{"id": "745648", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=745648", "title": "Béchamel sauce", "text": "Béchamel sauce\n\nBéchamel sauce (; ), also known as white sauce, is made from a white roux (butter and flour) and milk. It has been considered, since the seventeenth century, one of the mother sauces of French cuisine. It is used as the base for other sauces (such as Mornay sauce, which is Béchamel with cheese).\n\nBalsamell or Besciamella is the Italian equivalent of the French Béchamel: a very simple white sauce of flour, butter and milk. The sauce was originally from Renaissance Tuscany and was known as \"Salsa Colla or Colletta\" (\"glue sauce\") because of the gluey consistency of the sauce, and was brought to France by the chefs of Catherina de' Medici in 1533. Louis de Béchamel, Marquis de Nointel, was a financier who held the honorary post of chief steward to King Louis XIV. This sauce was prominent in Italian cooking texts of the Renaissance as \"salsa colla\", but was renamed much later in \"Le Cuisinier François\", published in 1651 by François Pierre La Varenne (1615–1678), \"chef de cuisine\" to Nicolas Chalon du Blé, marquis d'Uxelles. The foundation of French cuisine, the \"Cuisinier François\" ran through some thirty editions in seventy-five years.\n\nThe sauce originally was a veal velouté with a large amount of cream added.\n\nA recipe published in 1749 gave a modern and a traditional version of béchamel. The traditional one was made by melting butter in a pan, and then frying the peels of onions and root vegetables, green onions, and parsley in it; after cooking, cream was added, along with salt, coarse ground black pepper, and nutmeg. This was boiled, strained, and served with extra butter. The more modern recipe was to fry minced shallot, parsley, and green onion in butter, adding cream, salt, coarse ground black pepper, and nutmeg, as before, but then to add additional parsley and serve without straining. A 1750 recipe for turbot involved cooking the fish in broth, cooling it, and then reheating it in béchamel immediately before serving.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "745743", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=745743", "title": "Mirinda", "text": "Mirinda\n\nMirinda is a brand of soft drink originally created in Spain in 1959 and now owned by PepsiCo with global distribution. Its name may come from Esperanto, meaning \"admirable\".\n\nIt is available in fruit varieties including orange, citrus, grapefruit, apple, strawberry, raspberry, pineapple, pomegranate, banana, passionfruit, lemon, hibiscus, guarana, tangerine, pear, watermelon and grape flavours as well as tamarind. It is part of a beverage area often referred to as the flavour segment, comprising carbonated and non-carbonated fruit-flavoured beverages. The orange flavour of Mirinda now represents the majority of Mirinda sales worldwide following a major repositioning of the brand towards that flavour in the early 1990s.\n\nMirinda has been owned by PepsiCo since 1970 and is primarily commercialized outside the United States. It competes with Coca-Cola's Fanta, Britvic's Tango and Dr Pepper's Orange Crush or Sunkist brands, with flavour brands localized to individual countries. As with most soft drinks, Mirinda is available in multiple formulations of flavour, carbonation and sweetener depending on the taste of individual markets.\n\nMirinda was originally produced in Spain. It became available in the United States in late 2003 in bilingual packaging, and initially sold at a reduced price, presumably to become a competitor against Coke's Fanta brand. Since 2005, Mirinda flavours have largely been sold under the Tropicana Twister Soda brand in the United States except in Guam, where Pepsi began selling it under the Mirinda brand in 2007 (replacing Chamorro Punch Orange). PepsiCo also tried to sell Mirinda in Brazil in late 1996, but the brand was discontinued in 1998 after weak sales, keeping the local brand Sukita under production. In Italy, it is sold under the brand Slam.\n\nMirinda campaigns over the years have included the \"Mirinda Woman\" campaign in the 1970s. The \"Mirinda Craver\"\" ads produced by Jim Henson from 1975 to 1978 involved a monster called the Mirinda Craver (performed by Bob Payne and voiced by Allen Swift) craving the Mirinda drinks and will do anything to obtain a Mirinda drink. With the Mirinda Craver being a live-hand Muppet, Bob Payne was assisted in performing the Mirinda Craver by Louise Gold, Dave Holman, or Faz Fazakas with either one handling one of the arms of the Mirinda Craver.\n\nA campaign between 1994 and 1996 used the tag-line \"The Taste is in Mirinda\" with the Blue Man Group. In some markets, including Mexico, the Blue Man Group campaign re-launched Mirinda away from a multi-flavour positioning to a brand solely focused on the orange flavour. The Blue Man Group campaign showed the Blue Man Group competing to drink orange Mirinda and celebrating a successful drink with an open-mouth exclamation of 'Mirindaaaa'. Also in Mexico, Mirinda launched a campaign with the Pokémon anime series aimed at children with a promotion of gadgets with the characters of the manga series.\n\nMirinda advertising campaigns have been handled by Pepsi's stable of creative agencies, including BBDO and J. Walter Thompson.\n\nMirinda has good sales in India. It uses \"Pagalpanti Bhi Zaruri Hai\" (\"Madness is also needed\" in Hindi) as sales tagline while Indian actress Asin is the brand ambassador of Mirinda in India. It also launched the \"Mirinda Pagalpanti League\" campaign in India to connect youths around the nation and share their fun stories on TV commercials. Coca-Cola's brand Fanta is the major competitor of Mirinda in the Indian markets. The most popular flavours of Mirinda in India include orange and lime.\n\nMirinda regularly introduces special movie-themed editions in Asia. Recent ones included Batman (blueberry) and Superman (fruit punch). Mirinda has also recently released a new flavour of drinks called Mirinda creme. They come in three flavours: mango, raspberry and lime.\n\nMirinda is no longer sold in New Zealand, replaced with the introduction of PepsiCo's new Mountain Dew range (code red, live wire, pitch black, electro shock & passionfruit frenzy) of similar flavours.\n\n, Clendon New World and Countdown supermarkets were bringing back Mirinda with their two flavours raspberry and orange, but it was unknown whether this was only for a limited sale or a permanent official return.\n\nMirinda has a long history in many Arab Countries. It has been sold since the late 1970s. As in many other countries, Mirinda comes in different flavours. Gulf states and Egypt are the biggest markets for Mirinda.\n\nMirinda is also sold in France in Arab stores, Arab fast foods and also in some of the Large French Hypermarkets like Carrefour, Auchan and Geant etc. With flavours of apple, raspberry, pineapple, strawberry, red apple and orange either in little cans or in 2 liter bottles.\n\nMirinda's primary formulation is as an artificially flavoured beverage. However, it has been produced in the past with a percentage of fruit juice, usually due to local tax benefits tied to non-artificial juice ingredients.\n"}
{"id": "745944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=745944", "title": "Samaritan Hebrew", "text": "Samaritan Hebrew\n\nSamaritan Hebrew () is a reading tradition used liturgically by the Samaritans for reading the Ancient Hebrew language of the Samaritan Pentateuch, in contrast to Biblical Hebrew (the language of the Masoretic Jewish Pentateuch).\n\nFor the Samaritans, Ancient Hebrew ceased to be a spoken everyday language and was succeeded by Samaritan Aramaic, which itself ceased to be a spoken language some time between the 10th and 12th centuries and was succeeded by Arabic (or more specifically Samaritan Palestinian Arabic).\n\nThe phonology of Samaritan Hebrew is very similar to that of Samaritan Arabic, and is used by the Samaritans in prayer. Today, the spoken vernacular among Samaritans is evenly split between Modern Israeli Hebrew and Palestinian Arabic, depending on whether they reside in Holon (Israel) or in Shechem (i.e. Nablus, in Palestine’s Area A).\n\nThe Samaritan language first became known in detail to the Western world with the publication of a manuscript of the Samaritan Pentateuch in 1631 by Jean Morin. In 1616 the traveler Pietro della Valle had purchased a copy of the text in Damascus, and this manuscript, now known as Codex B, was deposited in a Parisian library. Between 1815 and 1835, Wilhelm Gesenius wrote his treatises on the original of the Samaritan version, proving that it postdated the Masoretic text.\n\nBetween 1957 and 1977 Ze'ev Ben-Haim published in five volumes his monumental Hebrew work on the Hebrew and Aramaic traditions of the Samaritans. Ben-Haim, whose views prevail today, proved that modern Samaritan Hebrew is not very different from Second Temple Samaritan, which itself was a language shared with the other residents of the region before it was supplanted by Aramaic.\n\nSamaritan Hebrew is written in the Samaritan alphabet, a direct descendant of the Paleo-Hebrew alphabet, which in turn is a variant of the earlier Phoenician alphabet.\n\nThe Samaritan alphabet is close to the script that appears on many Ancient Hebrew coins and inscriptions. By contrast, all other varieties of Hebrew, as written by Jews, employ the later 'square' Hebrew alphabet, which is in fact a variation of the Aramaic alphabet that Jews began using in the Babylonian captivity following the exile of the Kingdom of Judah in the 6th century BCE. During the 3rd century BCE, Jews began to use this stylized \"square\" form of the script used by the Achaemenid Empire for Imperial Aramaic, its chancellery script while the Samaritans continued to use the Paleo-Hebrew alphabet, which evolved into the Samaritan alphabet.\n\nConsonants\nVowels\n\nSamaritan Hebrew shows the following consonantal differences from Biblical Hebrew: The original phonemes do not have spirantized allophones, though at least some did originally in Samaritan Hebrew (evidenced in the preposition \"in\" ב- or ). has shifted to (except occasionally > ). has shifted to everywhere except in the conjunction ו- 'and' where it is pronounced as . has merged with , unlike in all other contemporary Hebrew traditions in which it is pronounced . The laryngeals have become or null everywhere, except before where sometimes become . is sometimes pronounced as , though not in Pentateuch reading, as a result of influence from Samaritan Arabic. may also be pronounced as , but this occurs only rarely and in fluent reading.\n\nPhonemic length is contrastive, e.g. רב 'great' vs. רחב 'wide'. Long vowels are usually the result of the elision of guttural consonants.\n\nStress generally differs from other traditions, being found usually on the penultimate and sometimes on the ultimate.\n\nThis: masc. ze, fem. zéot, pl. ílla.\n\nThat: alaz (written with a \"he\" at the beginning).\n\nWho, which: éšar.\n\nWho? = mi. What? = ma.\n\nWhen suffixes are added, ê and ô in the last syllable may become î and û: bôr (Judean bohr) \"pit\" > búrôt \"pits\". Note also af \"anger\" > éppa \"her anger\".\n\nSegolates behave more or less as in other Hebrew varieties: beţen \"stomach\" > báţnek \"your stomach\", ke′seph \"silver\" > ke′sefánu (Judean Hebrew \"kaspe′nu\") \"our silver\", dérek > dirkakimma \"your (m. pl.) road\" but áreş (in Judean Hebrew: \"’e′rets\") \"earth\" > árşak (Judean Hebrew \"’arts-ekha\") \"your earth\".\n\nThe definite article is a- or e-, and causes gemination of the following consonant, unless it is a guttural; it is written with a \"he\", but as usual, the \"h\" is silent. Thus, for example: énnar / ánnar = \"the youth\"; ellêm = \"the meat\"; a'émur = \"the donkey\".\n\nRegular plural suffixes are -êm (Judean Hebrew -im) masc., -ôt (Judean Hebrew: -oth.) fem: eyyamêm \"the days\", elamôt \"dreams\".\n\nDual is sometimes -ayem (Judean Hebrew: a′yim), šenatayem \"two years\", usually -êm like the plural yédêm \"hands\" (Judean Hebrew \"yadhayim\".)\n\nSamaritans have the tradition of either spelling out loud with the Samaritan letters\n\n\"Yohth, Ie', Baa, Ie’ \"\n\nor saying \"Shema\" meaning \"(The Divine) Name\" in Aramaic, similar to Judean Hebrew \"Ha-Shem\" .\n\nAffixes are:\n\n\"in, using\", pronounced:\n\n\"as, like\", pronounced:\n\n\"to\" pronounced:\n\n\"and\" pronounced:\n\nOther prepositions:\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "746225", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=746225", "title": "Prosciutto", "text": "Prosciutto\n\nProsciutto (, ) is an Italian dry-cured ham that is usually thinly sliced and served uncooked; this style is called prosciutto crudo in Italian (or simply crudo) and is distinguished from cooked ham, \"prosciutto cotto\".\n\nA number of regions have their own variations of prosciutto, each with degrees of protected status, but the most prized are the Prosciutto di Parma PDO from the Emilia-Romagna region and the Prosciutto di San Daniele PDO from the Friuli-Venezia Giulia region. Prosciutto mustn't be confused with Speck Alto Adige PGI, from the South Tyrol region, which may appear similar but there are some remarkable differences. \n\nThe names \"prosciutto\" and \"prosciutto crudo\" are generic, and not protected designations, and may name or describe a variety of hams more or less similar to Italian \"prosciutto crudo\" or other dry-cured hams worldwide.\n\nThe word \"prosciutto\" is derived from Latin \"pro\" (before) + \"exsuctus\" (past participle of \"exsugere\" \"to suck out [the moisture]\"); the Portuguese \"presunto\" has the same etymology. It is similar to the modern Italian verb \"prosciugare\" \"to dry thoroughly\" (from Latin \"pro\" + \"exsucare\" \"to extract the juices from\").\n\nProsciutto is made from either a pig's or a wild boar's hind leg or thigh, and the base term prosciutto specifically refers to this product. Prosciutto may also be made using the hind leg of other animals, in which case the name of the animal is included in the name of the product, for example \"prosciutto cotto d'agnello\" (\"lamb prosciutto\"). The process of making prosciutto can take from nine months to two years, depending on the size of the ham.\n\nA writer on Italian food, Bill Buford, describes talking to an old Italian butcher who says:\nToday, the ham is first cleaned, salted, and left for about two months. During this time, the ham is pressed, gradually and carefully so as to avoid breaking the bone, to drain all blood left in the meat. Next, it is washed several times to remove the salt, and is hung in a dark, well-ventilated environment. The surrounding air is important to the final quality of the ham; the best results are obtained in a cold climate. The ham is then left until dry. The time this takes varies, depending on the local climate and size of the ham. When the ham is completely dry, it is hung to air, either at room temperature or in a controlled environment, for up to 18 months.\n\nProsciutto is sometimes cured with nitrites (either sodium or potassium), which are generally used in other hams to produce the desired rosy color and unique flavor, but only sea salt is used in Protected Designation of Origin hams.\nSuch rosy pigmentation is produced by a direct chemical reaction of nitric oxide with myoglobin to form nitrosomyoglobin, followed by concentration of the pigments due to drying. Bacteria convert the added nitrite or nitrate to nitric oxide.\n\nSliced \"prosciutto crudo\" in Italian cuisine is often served as an antipasto, wrapped around \"grissini\", or accompanied with melon. It is also eaten as accompaniment to cooked spring vegetables, such as asparagus or peas. It may be included in a simple pasta sauce made with cream, or a Tuscan dish of tagliatelle and vegetables. It is used in stuffings for other meats, such as veal, as a wrap around veal or steak, in a filled bread, or as a pizza topping.\n\nSaltimbocca is an Italian veal dish, where escalopes of veal are topped with a sage leaf before being wrapped in prosciutto and then pan-fried. Prosciutto is often served in sandwiches and panini, sometimes in a variation on the Caprese salad, with basil, tomato and fresh mozzarella.\n\nUnder the Common Agricultural Policy of the European Union (EU), certain well-established meat products, including some local prosciutto, are covered by a Protected Designation of Origin (PDO) – DOP in Italian – and other, less stringent designations of geographical origin for traditional specialties. Various regions have their own PDO, whose specifications do not in general require ham from free-range pigs.\n\nThe two famous types of Italian \"prosciutto crudo\" are: \"prosciutto crudo di Parma\", from Parma, and \"prosciutto crudo di San Daniele\", from the San Daniele del Friuli area, in the Friuli-Venezia Giulia region. The \"prosciutto di Parma\" has a slightly nutty flavor from the Parmigiano Reggiano whey that is sometimes added to the pigs' diet. The \"prosciutto di San Daniele\", though, is darker in color and sweeter in flavor. For both of them, the product specifications completely prohibit additives such as nitrite and nitrate that are often present in unprotected products.\n\nEU-protected designations for prosciutto in Italy, each slightly different in color, flavor, and texture, are:\n\n\"Culatello\" is similar to prosciutto but is made from the filet or loin of the hind leg. It is cured primarily with salt only and aged in a beef or hogs bladder as a casing to prevent spoilage and contamination. \"Culatello di Zibello\" possesses PDO status. It is commonly served as a starter.\n\n\"Strolghino\" is a \"salame\" prepared from leftover cuts of \"culatello\".\n\nThe Italian name \"prosciutto\" was adapted to Slavic \"pršut\" in the eastern Adriatic. In Montenegro, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Slovenia (especially the Karst Plateau and the Vipava Valley),  Serbia, and Croatia (Dalmatia, Island of Krk and Istria), \"pršut\" is a common form of dry-cured ham. \"Pršut\" from Dalmatia, Herzegovina and Serbia is smoked, unlike the Italian product, while that from Slovenia, Istria and Krk is not smoked. A mountain village in Montenegro produces a delicacy known as \"njeguški pršut\".  \n\nThe Slovenian variant \"Kraški pršut\" and the Croatian variants \"Dalmatinski pršut\", \"Krčki pršut\" and \"Istarski pršut\" have a Protected Geographical Indication within the EU.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "746795", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=746795", "title": "Muleta", "text": "Muleta\n\nA muleta is a stick with a red cloth hanging from it that is used in the final third (\"tercio de muleta\" or \"de muerte\") of a bullfight. It is different from the cape used by the matador earlier in the fight (\"capote de brega\"). \n\nThe muleta obscures the sword, and as in his earlier work with the cape, the bullfighter uses it to attract the bull in a series of passes, demonstrating his control over it. The red color of the muleta is actually unnecessary, though, as bulls are dichromatic, meaning neither the cape nor the muleta color can be accurately discerned by the bull. The color is retained merely for tradition.\n\nThere are a number of distinct styles of pass, each with its own name. With the cape, for instance, the verónica is a pass in which the matador slowly swings the cape away from the charging bull while keeping his feet in the same position. The faena is the final series of passes before the kill, in which the matador uses the muleta to manoeuvre the bull into a position to stab it between the shoulders, cutting the aorta. If this fails he must then cut the bull's spinal cord with a second sword, killing it instantly. The task of killing the bull is given to the matador alone; his title means literally \"killer\".\n"}
{"id": "748016", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=748016", "title": "Macumba", "text": "Macumba\n\nMacumba () is a word that has a dual meaning. It can be used when describing a musical instrument or a form of witchcraft (or magic). Before it was used for a single religion Macumba was originally used to categorize all religions who practiced or believed in animistic-syncretism during the 1800s. In the 1900s Macumba became a slang term among Brazilians who aren’t affiliated with these religions. The religions that are referred to under the umbrella term Macumba are Candomblé, Giro, and Mesa Blanca. Although the word Macumba may be used among Afro-Brazilian religion praticioners to kindly refer to their practices, it is also used as a pejorative and even a racial slur by evangelical hate groups against these religions.\n\nBrazilian Macumba is the name that was used to designate all Bantu religious practices, mainly in the Brazilian state of Bahia in the nineteenth century.Later (in the 20th century), these practices were organized in what is now called Umbanda, Quimbanda and Omoloko. Macumba became common in parts of Brazil, Uruguay, Paraguay and Argentina. This word is used by some people as a pejorative word meaning black magic. The word macumba is used in Brazil, Paraguay, Argentina and Uruguay, to refer to any ritual or religion of Afro-American origin, and although its use by outsiders is usually derogatory (referring to all kinds of religion, superstitions and rituals related with luck) and it is considered offensive, among its practitioners it is not seen negatively.\nMacumba is practiced in Brazil, Argentina, Paraguay and Uruguay. There appears to be a relationship with the concept of the Boto (the fresh-water porpoise found in the Amazonas River and its tributaries) having shape-shifting abilities and then while in the form of a human male having sexual relations with young women. This belief was noted in several Indigenous American villages along the Amazonas (Solimões) River, Rio Negro, and Rio Japurá.\n\nMacumba is widely practiced throughout the Southern Cone. Many practitioners continue to practice their traditional religions (Christianity, Islam, Judaism, etc.) but also practice Macumba, often in violation of the tenets of their official religious affiliations but which their social environment appears to quietly accept.\n\nSome practitioners purport to use Macumba to inflict harm, financial failure, illness, death, etc. on other people for various reasons. Commonly, a Macumba spiritual leader will ask for a picture of the person on whom retribution is sought, with the name of the person written on the back of the picture. This kind of practice is often seen as sorcery or black magic.\n\nOut of all the religions grouped into Macumba only followers of Candomblé sacrifice animals during their rituals. Animals are also sacrificed during Consultas. In Candomblé blood is a very sacred and symbolic item and is used as often as possible. Blood to these followers represents life pure essence and a bond that unites them all together as family.\n\nGiro on the other hand use palm tree oil (azeite de dendé) in their rituals, this is because using blood has formed a negative stigma around Candomblé as many people associate animal sacrifice with savagery and see it as backwards. This dependence on blood and animal sacrifice has led to a loss of converts and a stigma to form around Candomblé and its followers. Since dendé is a similar hue to blood it works well as a replacement in many rituals that would require it. This also allows followers of Giro to practice without fear of being stigmatized.\n\nMesa Blanca on the other hand believes that blood and dendé can bring evil and misfortune on those who dare to use it in rituals. Dendé for example is linked to aggressive spirits of slaves, as well as other evils that the group has shunned and removed from their practices. The movement away from these two mediums can be seen as a way to distance themselves from Afro-Brazilian religions and the Macumba itself.\n\nHoney is also important to these religions as it represents the spirits of Native Indians, the use of honey can be for healing as well as reconciliation. Honey is an entirely different color than blood and Dendé so it is not associated with the evils of first two liquids.\n\nWater is the final liquid and is the main symbol for most religions other than Candomblé (which is blood). Water can be used to gaze into during consultas as it is believed looking into water can help attain wisdom or information. Water symbolizes life as it has the ability to heal but it can also represent the ability to avoid death.\n\nThe hierarchy of many of these religions is family based and can be seen by the addressing of leaders in Candomblé as \"mother\" and \"father\". Also many leaders of these religions are female as a mother figure is needed.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "748898", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=748898", "title": "Coca-Cola C2", "text": "Coca-Cola C2\n\nCoca-Cola C2 (also referred to as Coke C2, C2 Cola, or simply C2) was a cola-flavored beverage introduced by The Coca-Cola Company first in Japan, then later on June 7, 2004 in the United States (and shortly thereafter, Canada), in response to the low-carbohydrate diet trend. This Coke product was marketed as having half the carbohydrates, sugars and calories compared to standard Coca-Cola. It contains aspartame, acesulfame potassium, and sucralose in addition to the high fructose corn syrup typically found in cola beverages distributed in America. Aside from the high fructose corn syrup, one 12-ounce can of Coca Cola C2 contains 19 mg of aspartame, 4 mg of sucralose and 19 mg of acesulfame potassium. The packaging design differs from other Coke products in that the logos are printed in black. For marketing on radio and television, and movie theaters the Queen song \"I Want to Break Free\" was used. When it was first introduced, though, The Rolling Stones song \"You Can't Always Get What You Want\" was used.\n\nAmerican sales did not live up to early expectations mainly due to customer disinterest in a mid-calorie soda, and partly due to the success of Coca-Cola Zero, a zero-calorie version of Coca-Cola; however, Coca Cola said the brand would remain in its lineup, even while Pepsi discontinued its equivalent product, Pepsi Edge, in late 2005, just one year after its introduction. Many store shelves completely replaced the product with Coca-Cola Zero due to display, shelving and storage limitations, and with the introduction of Coca-Cola Cherry Zero, the product disappeared from all store shelves where it had previously remained, and in 2013, it was replaced by Coca-Cola Life, which was marketed for using Stevia as opposed to artificial sweeteners.\n\n"}
{"id": "749027", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=749027", "title": "Metaxa", "text": "Metaxa\n\nMetaxa () is a Greek amber spirit created by Spyros Metaxa in 1888. Its taste comes from the marriage of Muscat wines from the island of Samos, aged wine distillates, and Mediterranean botanicals. \n\nThe METAXA Collection consists of METAXA 5 Stars, METAXA 7 Stars, METAXA 12 Stars, METAXA Grande Fine, METAXA Private Reserve, METAXA Angels’ Treasure and METAXA AEN.\n\nMETAXA is recommended to be enjoyed neat or on a single ice cube. METAXA 5 Stars & METAXA 7 Stars can also be mixed in long drinks or cocktails, and METAXA 12 Stars can be offered in Signature cocktails. It is sold in more than 50 countries, with China being its most recent introduction.\n\nMETAXA has been part of the Rémy Cointreau Group since 2000.\n\nBorn in 1848 in Greece, Spyros Metaxa was a descendant of a family of silk merchants. His first foray into business was in the trade of fine goods. During his professional travels, he was exposed to a number of different spirits and wines from all around the world.\n\nSpirits of his time tended to be harsh on the palate, without much aroma or character. Spyros Metaxa set out to create a unique spirit that was smooth yet intense. That’s how in 1888 he created METAXA, the Original Greek Spirit.\n\nAided by his brothers, Elias and Alexander, Spyros Metaxa built his first distillery in 1888 in Piraeus, the port of Athens. The inspiration for the “Salamina Warrior”, the METAXA emblem, was a medallion found in the foundations of the distillery.\nThe Battle of Salamina took place in 480BC in the waters near Piraeus. The Greek navy was well outnumbered by the invading Persian forces, but heroically fought them off. The Salamina Warrior thus became a symbol for risk-taking and courage – and was chosen as the emblem for Spyros Metaxa’s new venture.\n\nMETAXA ended up becoming a commercial success and it soon started being exported to countries across the Mediterranean. In 1900, it was exported to the USA for the first time.\n\nIn 1968, the distillery and the METAXA cellars were relocated to new facilities in Athens’ northern suburb of Kifissia where they continue to be to this day.\n\nAlthough it was first compared to a Cognac, and later to a Brandy, METAXA is not classified in either of these spirit categories, as its blend contains Muscat wines and Mediterranean botanicals. METAXA is thus a liquor.\n\nThe House of Metaxa doesn’t have a Master Distiller or a Master Blender, but a Metaxa Master. The House’s current Metaxa Master, Constantinos Raptis, is the fifth in line since 1888. For more than 25 years, he has been overseeing the entire creation process.\n\nHe first makes his selection of the Muscat wines from Samos, chosen for their aromatic concentration and intensity. He then chooses his aged wine distillates for their character and elegance.\n\nThe wine distillates and Muscat wines are aged separately, until Constantinos Raptis decides they are ready to be married in Limousin oak casks. A bouquet of Mediterranean botanicals brings the final touch.\n\nMETAXA 5 Stars: floral and versatile, best explored neat, on ice or in long drinks.\n\nMETAXA 7 Stars: fruity and generous, best explored neat, on ice or in cocktails.\n\nMETAXA 12 Stars: the flagship of the House. Its mature and distinctive character is best explored neat or on a single rock. Bartenders and mixologists offer it in signature cocktails.\n\nMETAXA Grande Fine: Presented in a porcelain bottle, METAXA Grande Fine is inspired by the scenery of Greece. It is best enjoyed neat.\n\nMETAXA Private Reserve: The very first own creation by Constantinos Raptis in 1992. Created once a year, in a single batch, with blends that have reached their peak of expression. Best enjoyed neat.\n\nMETAXA Angels’ Treasure: In the cellars of the House, the Metaxa Master has captured blends aged for decades that have reached their peak of concentration. METAXA Angels’ Treasure’s expressive aromatic character is best enjoyed neat.\n\nMETAXA AEN Cask No 1: In 2008, to celebrate its 120 anniversary, an elixir of over 200 blends drawn from Cask No.1 named after Spyros Metaxa himself. A limited number of 1888 crystal decanters were created. \n\nMETAXA AEN Cask No 2: in 2018, to celebrate the 130 anniversary of the House, Metaxa Master Constantinos Raptis released 130 decanters of METAXA AEN Cask No 2. It contains rare blends from “The Family of Original Casks”, brought in from the first distillery in Piraeus and protected through five generations of Metaxa Masters.\nIn 2018, on the event of its 130th Anniversary, the House of Metaxa revealed a new brand campaign, expressing its vision of exploration. Starting in the summer, this 360° campaign rolled out globally across all METAXA markets.\n\nTo embody this sensorial journey, METAXA selected characters who convey a sense of exploration in their daily lives - individuals who share the METAXA vision: Mike Horn, Laura Bingham and Guillaume Néry, 3 internationally acclaimed explorers. \n\n"}
{"id": "749212", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=749212", "title": "Pares (food)", "text": "Pares (food)\n\nThe Filipino term Pares commonly refers to Beef Pares, a braised beef stew served with garlic fried rice, and a bowl of clear soup. It is particularly associated with specialty roadside diner-style establishments known as \"Pares House\" that specialize in serving these type of meals. In recent years, it had also become a common dish served in \"karinderyas\", small eateries that serve economical meals for local residents. \n\nInformally, \"Pares\" can also refer to any dish that is cooked in the manner reminiscent of the \"asado-style\" (i.e. stewed in a sweet-soy sauce).\n\nThe Filipino word Pares (\"pronounced as PAH res\") literally means \"pairs\" in English. The name for this style of serving meals comes from the practice of \"pairing\" the meal with garlic fried rice and a light beef broth soup. \n\nBeef Pares, or \"Pares\" as it is commonly known, is a meal that consist of \"beef asado\" (beef stewed in a sweet-soy sauce), garlic fried rice and a bowl of beef broth soup. \n\nThe soup may originate from the broth in which the meat is simmered in until tender before being seasoned with the sweet-soy sauce but it can also be prepared separately and be made with beef bouillon cubes instead. This soup is usually made and seasoned with onion, garlic, peppercorns, chives, and onion leeks. Some cooks also add bay leaves to this broth to improve the flavor. \n\nA garnish of chopped green onion and fried garlic mince is often added atop the dish before serving. Steamed rice is sometimes served instead of fried rice, depending on personal preference of the customer. Some Filipino restaurants also offer the option to serve the dish with an accompaniment of noodles instead of rice.\n"}
{"id": "749582", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=749582", "title": "Uunijuusto", "text": "Uunijuusto\n\nUunijuusto is a Finnish dish made from cow's colostrum, the first milk of a calved cow, by adding a pinch of salt (some 0.5 grams per a litre of milk) and by baking the milk in an oven (30 minutes in 150 degrees Celsius, and for a few moments in 250 degrees to get the color). Sometimes \"uunijuusto\" is also made from ordinary milk and eggs.\n\nThe word \"uunijuusto\" literally means \"oven cheese\", but \"uunijuusto\" is not properly a cheese.\n\n\"Uunijuusto\" is typically eaten for dessert with berries (often cloudberries) or jam or \"mehukeitto\" which is a sort of soup made from fresh berries such as lingonberries or redcurrants. \n\n"}
{"id": "749839", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=749839", "title": "Tizer", "text": "Tizer\n\nTizer is a red-coloured, citrus-flavoured soft drink bottled in Cumbernauld and sold in the United Kingdom. The name originally comes from the phrase \"Tizer the Appetizer\". It was launched in 1924 by Fred and Tom Pickup of Manchester when it was known as \"Pickup's Appetizer\", and is the offspring of Vimto and Irn-Bru. After the death of the Pickup brothers it was owned by the Armour Trust before being sold to the Scottish drinks company A.G. Barr plc for £2.5 million in 1972. As is the case with Barr's other famous drink Irn-Bru, Tizer's exact recipe has not been made public, although a list of ingredients and nutritional data is given on the product's packaging. In 2003, Tizer decided to sell other-flavoured versions of Tizer, such as \"Purple\" and \"Green\" versions. There was also a brief \"fruitz\" variation of Tizer in 2004. From 1996 to 2007, Tizer was stylised as T!zer. \n\nIn 2007 the company stopped using the \"Ed the Head\" mascot. Tizer was re-branded with the slogan \"Original Great Taste\" and a classic recipe with fewer additives and no E numbers. It was also given classic 1976 style packaging. However, despite the relaunch making great play of the addition of real fruit juice and the absence of artificial flavourings, colourings and sweeteners, in 2009 the recipe was returned to the original to remove the real fruit juice and reintroduce natural flavourings, natural colours and sweeteners (Acesulfame-K). Tizer was rebranded in 2011 with a new logo and the slogan \"The Great British Pop\".\n\nTizer sponsored a roller coaster in Southport called the \"Traumatizer\". The ride was closed with the park in 2006 and relocated to Blackpool Pleasure Beach, where it became known as \"Infusion\". Tizer is lemon, lime and apple flavoured.\nAlso mentioned in Rick Riordain’s book “The Ship Of The Dead” in his series “Magnus Chase and the Gods Of Asgard”.\n\nTizer Ice was launched in the late 1990s. The drink included menthol, giving it the sensation of tasting cold, even at room temperature. Later branded \"Ice by Tizer\", the product did not sell well and was removed from sale. Whilst known as Tizer Ice, the mascot of the drink was a variation of Ed the Tizer Head. Its sole video advertisement which was shown in cinemas featured a character known as the \"Iceman\".\n\nA 1999 print advertisement which showed children with their faces pressed against a glass surface with the slogan \"How many kids can you get in your fridge?\" was criticised as \"inappropriate\" by the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents, which had recorded deaths of children trapped inside refrigerators.\n\nTizer Diet was a short-lived low-calorie alternative to Tizer, originally sold in the late 1980s when known as Sugar Free Tizer, and again from 1997 to 2001 as Tizer Diet. Its 2001 advertising campaign included a bus shelter advertisement in the form of a funhouse mirror bearing the Tizer Diet logo, designed to make the viewer appear thinner.\n\nTizer has been advertised under various slogans. One 1982 television advertisement for the drink featured dwarf actor David Rappaport wearing star-shaped sunglasses at a disco, the advert finishing with the slogan \"You can tell it's Tizer when your eyes are shut\". A 1986 campaign used the slogan \"I'se got the Ize\".\n\nA campaign in the early 1990s featured a character filmed in black and white against a bubbly red backdrop, who would say something like \"stuff the donkey sanctuary, stuff donkeys'. At the end, word fragments appeared, such as \"appe\", \"adver\", \"depu\", \"bap\", \"legitima\", \"dogma\" and \"chaz\", all words which could be completed with \"tizer\" as a suffix.\n\nIn 1996, Tizer was rebranded, and the cans and bottles were redesigned to feature a new logo and a mascot, known as \"Tizer Head\" and later \"Ed the Head\". Ed appeared as a red-coloured human head, the top of which was opened so that Tizer could be poured in. Ed was played by famed actor Roger Moore's son. \n\nIn 1997 Tizer sponsored the rave event Rezerection/Rez, on the basis that the reverse of the name is \"Rez It\" (\"Tizer\" backwards). It was the main soft drink available at the events.\n\nAs part of a rebranding process in 2003, the cans were changed to red and Ed the Head's expression was changed to a smile. The ads featured a chef battling a lobster, a flange of gorillas and monkeys drawn in the style of the Gorillaz artwork. In 2004, Tizer aired a campaign depicting a red chameleon remaining the same colour despite a number of different coloured backgrounds—the campaign's slogan was \"No, we're not changing colour.\" The television adverts ended with Ed the Head appearing from the bottle and saying \"Tizer, it's a red thing\".\n\nTizer are known for their distribution of drink fridges, both full-sized ones for restaurants, shops and cafés, and smaller \"mini-fridges\" for public sale. Their full-sized, illuminated drink fridges from 1997 to 2003 were blue, whilst 2003–2007 fridges were red. They also distribute mobile can coolers, normally for usage in shops, and vending machines.\n\nTizer was also sold at the discontinued pizza restaurant chain, Pizzaland. In 1995, cans of Tizer offered that the specific can was \"worth £1 at Pizzaland\" when £4 or more was spent. That same year, Tizer were responsible for the \"£150,000 worth of hi-tech prizes\" competition, one of the biggest soft drink competitions at the time.\n\nA successful campaign for Tizer from 2001 saw the brand package four bottles of the drink in blue lunchboxes. This was inspired by the Tango lunchbox in 2000.\n\n\nFor the slogans \"Refresh Your Head\" and \"Freeze Your Head\", the \"R\" in \"Your\", and the \"E\" and \"D\" in \"Head\", are highlighted so they spell out the word \"Red\".\n\nThe 1974 song \"Back in Judy's Jungle\" by Brian Eno mentions the soft drink, as does the 1983 song \"Party, Party\" by Elvis Costello and the 1991 song \"King Leer\" by Morrissey. The drink is also mentioned in the lyrics of the 1996 song \"Sing Something Simple\" by the neo-progressive rock act named Grace. Deacon Blue mentions the drink in the chorus of the title track on their 1991 release \"Fellow Hoodlums\". In Billy Connolly's \"Casual Vomit\" sketch, found on \"The Best Comedy Album Ever\", he suggests Bacardi and Tizer as the ingredients for an unpleasant drink.\n\n\"Tizer\" was also a garage mix by DJ Tizer in 1994.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "749876", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=749876", "title": "Vimto", "text": "Vimto\n\nVimto is a soft drink sold in the United Kingdom. It was first manufactured as a health tonic in cordial form, then decades later as a carbonated drink. It contains the juice of grapes, raspberries and blackcurrants (in a 3% concentration), flavoured with herbs and spices. The original recipe was invented in 1908 by (John) Noel Nichols. Nichols grew up in the Scottish town of Shortridge.\n\nVimto has also been made into a sweet and an ice lolly. It is available in cans and bottles and as a draught soft drink in pubs.\n\nVimto was created in 1908 at 19 Granby Row in the centre of Manchester England, by (John) Noel Nichols of Blackburn, Lancashire (1883–1966), a wholesaler of herbs, spices and medicines. He saw the market opening for soft drinks due to the temperance movement and the passage of the 1908 Licensing Act. It was originally sold under the name Vim Tonic, which Nichols shortened to Vimto in 1912. Vimto was originally registered as a health tonic or medicine, which was then re-registered in 1913 as a cordial. In 1910, because the Granby Row premises had become too small, they moved to a warehouse at Chapel Street, Salford, then to Old Trafford (1927) and finally (1971) to a state of the art plant in Wythenshawe, Manchester.\nIn the 1990s, Vimto print advertisements used the cartoon character Purple Ronnie, along with slightly rude poems by Giles Andreae, the creator of Purple Ronnie. In 2003, Purple Ronnie was dropped, and a new creative direction was adopted, revolving around the benefits of 'Shlurpling the Purple'. This, in turn, led to the launch in 2006 of Billy and his Dad's Pants – a modern-day morality story in which, despite turning up at the swimming pool with his Dad's pants in the middle of his rolled up towel, Billy wins out with ingenuity and humour. The theme tune 'Dad's Pants' become something of a cult classic, and was based on the Loudon Wainwright III song, \"Dead Skunk\". A sculpture entitled \"A Monument to Vimto\" (1992), carved out of an oak tree from a sustainable forest by Kerry Morrison, is on Granby Row in central Manchester. The statue was restored and repainted in 2011. The sculpture commemorates the fact that Vimto was originally produced on this site.\n\nVimto is currently produced by Cott Beverages in both Leicestershire and Yorkshire on behalf of Vimto Soft Drinks, a division of Nichols plc. Nichols moved out of manufacturing in 2003 when it closed its final production site in Golborne. Vimto is also manufactured under licence in Saudi Arabia in Dammam City, Yemen and The Gambia. A \"Sunday Times\" article claims that it is considered to be the most popular drink during the holy month of Ramadan in some Arab countries. \n\nThe drink was also made under licence in the United Kingdom by A.G. Barr in 1996.\n\nIn 2014 the recipe of Vimto Fizzy was changed to include Acesulfame K and Sucralose.\n\nEllis Wilkinson Mineral Water facilitated the production of drinks for Vimto in their early days of trading.\n\nA subsidiary of Nichols plc, Cabana is the distribution arm of the company, and operates via a UK-wide network of distributors that are, in the main, independent. In Scotland and Sussex, the distributor is a wholly owned subsidiary of Cabana: (Scotland - Cariel, and Sussex - Beacon Drinks Now closed). Vimto is currently available in sixty-five countries and the number of countries in which it is on sale is growing.\n\nBoth a still, dilutable version (\"Vimto Cordial\") and a carbonated premixed version (\"Fizzy Vimto\") are available in the UK. While Vimto has its origins in Northern England it can now be found both nationally and internationally. The Cordial version is more widely sold, and is available in concentrate and ready-to-drink varieties.\n\nVimto is also available in a slush variety alongside many other different Vimto confectionery products, such as Vimto bars, lollipops, Rip Rolls, candy sprays and Jelly Babies.\n\nVimto is also available in a summer flavour, containing ingredients such as orange and apple both of which are cordial products. Vimto was the UK's fastest growing soft drinks brand by value in 2006 (as measured by ACNielsen).\n\nA cocktail known as the Cheeky Vimto or \"Crazy Vimto\" is also drunk in the UK. However, Vimto is not an ingredient of this beverage, the name comes from its resemblance to the original product; instead, it contains port and Blue WKD. There is also a variant of this cocktail called \"Dirty Vimto\" that replaces the port with Buckfast Tonic Wine.\n\nVimto is also often made as a hot beverage by simply adding boiling water to the concentrate, and is very popular in this form throughout the North of England. Vimto is often made with hot water especially during the winter months. It is also taken to sporting events in vacuum flasks by spectators as a warming drink to fend off the winter chill.\n\nVarious alternate-flavoured variants of Vimto were introduced over the years; cherry- and strawberry-flavoured variants, known as \"Cherry Vimto\" and \"Strawberry Vimto\" have become part of the range. In 2016, a new variant, \"Vimto Remix\", was introduced. This range consists of various alternate flavour mixes that were introduced each year - mango, strawberry and pineapple in 2016, raspberry, orange and passionfruit in 2017 and most recently, watermelon, strawberry and peach.\n\nIn the Arabian Peninsula, Vimto has had over 80 years of dominance as the beverage of choice for the iftar or sunset feast during the Islamic holy fasting month of Ramadan. As of 2013, Aujan, the local bottler in Saudi Arabia, has been producing over 20 million bottles per year for the GCC market.\nAn article in \"The Sunday Times\" mentioned some 15 million bottles were sold during the one-month season in 2007.\n\nIn Saudi Arabia, Vimto is manufactured under licence by the Aujan Industrial Company and has a 90% market share in the cordial concentrated drinks market. Every year, the company launches aggressive marketing campaigns on Arab satellite TV channels that in recent years have become very popular, and achieved cult status with viral marketing videos exchanged on the Internet.\n\nVimto was introduced to The Gambia and Senegal in the 1980s where it remains popular.\n\nIn 2011 Vimto once again became widely available throughout the Republic of Ireland, through Tesco and the local version of Iceland shops.\n\nIn Pakistan, Vimto is produced, under licence, by Mehran Bottlers.\n\nIn Nepal recently Vimto is manufactured under licence by Himganga Beverage Pvt Ltd.\n\n"}
{"id": "751563", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=751563", "title": "Maker's Mark", "text": "Maker's Mark\n\nMaker's Mark is a small-batch bourbon whiskey produced in Loretto, Kentucky, by Beam Suntory. It is bottled at 90 U.S. proof (45% alcohol by volume) and sold in squarish bottles sealed with red wax. The distillery offers tours, and is part of the American Whiskey Trail and the Kentucky Bourbon Trail.\n\nMaker's Mark's origin began when T. William \"Bill\" Samuels Sr., purchased the \"Burks' Distillery\" in Loretto, Kentucky, for $35,000 on October 1, 1953. Production began in 1954, and the first run was bottled in 1958 under the brand's dipped red wax seal (U.S. trademark serial number 73526578).\n\nIn the 1960s and 1970s, Maker's Mark was widely marketed with the tag line, \"It tastes expensive ... and is.\"\n\nThe distillery was listed on the National Register of Historic Places on December 31, 1974, and designated a National Historic Landmark on December 16, 1980, listed as \"Burks' Distillery\", the first distillery in America to be recognized while the landmark buildings were in active production.\n\nMaker's Mark was sold to Hiram Walker & Sons in 1981, which was acquired by the distillery giant Allied Domecq in 1987. When Allied-Domecq was bought by Pernod Ricard in 2005 the Maker's Mark brand was sold to Deerfield, Illinois-based Fortune Brands. Fortune Brands split in 2011, with its alcoholic beverage business becoming Beam Inc.. Beam became Beam Suntory, in 2014.\n\nAfter the brand's creation by Bill Samuels, Sr., its production was overseen by his son Bill Samuels, Jr. until 2011 when he announced his retirement as president and CEO at the age of 70. His son Rob Samuels succeeded him in April 2011.\n\nOn February 9, 2013, the company sent a mass e-mail announcing a plan to reduce the alcohol strength of the whiskey, citing supply issues as the reason for the change. The result of this change would have been to reduce the product from 90 U.S. proof (45% alcohol by volume) to 84 U.S. proof (42% abv), which would have stretched inventory by about 6%. Maker's Mark said that their own tasting panel of distillery employees reported no taste difference in the lower proof, while industry analysts said that the difference would be subtle, and since most drinkers mix the bourbon or serve it on ice, few would be able to notice it. According to Neil Irwin for \"The Washington Post\"'s \"Wonkblog\", the decision can be explained by Beam's desire to keep Maker's Mark competitive as a premium bourbon at mid-range bars, and a well drink among high-end bars.\nOn February 17, the company said that it had reconsidered its decision after receiving a strong negative reaction from customers, and that it would continue to bottle at the original strength. Some overseas markets like Australia will continue to sell the whiskey at 40%.\n\nIn January 2014, Beam Inc announced its sale to Suntory Holdings, creating the third largest distilled spirits maker in the world. News of the proposed sale included bourbon executives vowing \"the product taste won't change – and neither will the company's historic purity standards.\"\n\nIn 2014, Maker's Mark released a Maker's Mark Cask Strength Bourbon in limited quantities initially available to consumers only at their distillery gift shop. ABV fluctuates each batch between 53% and 58%. The product was released on the global market in July 2016.\n\nIn November 2015 Suntory announced a major expansion of its distillery.\n\nIn November 2018, Dave Pickerell, who served as master distiller, passed away at 70 years old. Pickerell was called the \"Johnny Appleseed of American Whiskey\", and was subsequently honored by Metallica. \n\nMaker's Mark is unusual in that no rye is used as part of the mash. Instead of rye Maker's Mark uses red winter wheat (16%), along with corn (70%) and malted barley (14%) in the Mash Bill. During the planning phase of Maker's Mark, Samuels allegedly developed seven candidate mash bills for the new bourbon. As he did not have time to distill and age each one for tasting, he instead made a loaf of bread from each recipe and the one with no rye was judged the best tasting. Samuels also received considerable assistance and recipes from Stitzel-Weller owner Pappy Van Winkle, whose distillery produced the wheated Old Fitzgerald and W. L. Weller bourbons.\n\nMaker's Mark is aged for around six years, being bottled and marketed when the company's tasters agree that it is ready. Maker's Mark is one of the few distillers to rotate the barrels from the upper to the lower levels of the aging warehouses during the aging process to even out the differences in temperature during the process. The upper floors are exposed to the greatest temperature variations during the year, so rotating the barrels ensures that the bourbon in all the barrels have the same quality and taste.\n\nMaker's Mark is marketed as a \"small batch\" Bourbon. Most producers of so-called \"small batch\" Bourbons do not clarify exactly what they mean by the term. The producer of Maker's Mark says that the traditional definition is \"A bourbon that is produced/distilled in small quantities of approximately 1,000 gallons or less (20 barrels) from a mash bill of around 200 bushels of grain\".\n\nMaker's Mark is sold in squarish bottles that are sealed with red wax. T. William Samuels' wife, Marjorie \"Margie\" Samuels, gave the whiskey its name, drew its label, and thought up the wax dipping that gives the bottle its distinctive look. It was introduced to the market in 1959. Three varieties are marketed: the original, a mint julep flavor with green wax on the neck released seasonally in limited amounts, and Maker's 46 (47% alcohol by volume), a variety flavored by introducing seared French oak staves into the traditional charred white oak barrel toward the end of its aging. The original has been bottled at 90 U.S. proof (45% alcohol by volume).\n\nMaker's Mark is, along with George Dickel and Old Forester, one of a handful of American-made whiskies that uses the Scottish spelling \"whisky\" rather than the predominant American \"whiskey\".\n\nMaker's Mark began creating branded restaurants with the October 2004 opening of Maker's Mark Bourbon House & Lounge in the Fourth Street Live! entertainment complex in downtown Louisville, Kentucky. In addition to serving Maker's Mark it features bourbons from each of Kentucky's distilleries. The menu was designed by Chef Al Paris of the famous Zanzibar Blue restaurant in Philadelphia.\n\nA second such establishment opened in Kansas City, Missouri's downtown Power & Light District in 2008, and a third at the Indiana Live Casino in Shelbyville, Indiana just outside Indianapolis in March, 2009.\n\nMaker's Mark bourbon has earned solid marks at international Spirit ratings competitions. Its primary bourbon earned a gold medal at the 2010 San Francisco World Spirit Ratings Competition and a score of 90–95 from Wine Enthusiast in 2007. The Maker's Mark 46—which benefits from longer aging and exposure to toasted French oak staves—has earned similar ratings. Jane MacQuitty, spirits writer for the \"London Times\", said of Maker's Mark that \"What separates this bourbon from the rest is the softness and smoothness of its rich oak, vanilla and raisiny-like flavours.\" Food critic Morgan Murphy said \"Dark as its red wax seal, this beautiful whiskey packs apple spice, vanilla, and a front-of-the-mouth crispness that is admired the world over.\"\n\nMaker's Mark began special edition bottles featuring Keeneland bottles for horses in 1997. The label was white with a dark green horse and green wax. Other Keeneland bottles include famous Derby winners such as Secretariat (2003), Seattle Slew (2004), Affirmed (2005), American Pharoah (2016), and Justify (2018).\n\nOn July 20, 2012, Maker's Mark started selling a limited edition bottle featuring University of Louisville's head football coach Charlie Strong. The bottles were created to raise money for a new Academic Center of Excellence on UofL's campus. Maker's Mark also has marketed special label bottles with the images of Hall of Fame Basketball Coach Rick Pitino and athletic director Tom Jurich for the same purpose.\n\nMaker's Mark has featured several University of Kentucky sports personalities on its University of Kentucky (UK) line of limited release bottles. A limited quantity of bottles can be signed for free by the personality that was selected for the bottle and by a member of the Samuels family. The signing party is held at Keeneland horse track in the university's home city of Lexington.\n\nThe first UK special edition bottle was produced in 1993. In celebration of the 1996 NCAA Men's Basketball Champions, Maker's Mark printed a bottle that had a denim background with white type. The team's coach at the time, Rick Pitino, signed the bottle.\n\nOther bottles include: Wildcat Bottle (2001), Bill Keightley (2002), Rupp's Runts (2006), The Unforgettables (2007), Joe B. Hall (first in 2008 and again in 2016), Rich Brooks (2009), John Calipari (2010), Tim Couch (2012), Dan Issel (2013), Mark Stoops (2014), and Adolph Rupp (2015). The 2015 bottle was the first in a series honoring the five basketball coaches who won NCAA titles at UK; Pitino was honored in 2017 and Tubby Smith in 2018, with Calipari to be honored for a second time in 2019.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "752573", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=752573", "title": "Tongyangxi", "text": "Tongyangxi\n\nTongyangxi (), also known as Shim-pua marriage in Min Nan dialects (; and in phonetic Hokkien transcription using Chinese characters: 新婦仔), was a tradition of arranged marriage dating back to pre-modern China, in which a family would adopt a pre-adolescent daughter as a future bride for one of their pre-adolescent (usually infant) sons, and the children would be raised together. \n\nA direct translation of the Taiwanese (Hokkien) word \"sim-pu-a\" is \"little daughter-in-law,\" in which the characters \"sim-pu\" () mean daughter-in-law and the particle character \"a\" ( or ) indicates a diminutive. The similarly used Mandarin Chinese term \"tongyangxi\" () means literally \"child (童) raised (養) daughter-in-law (媳)\" and is the term typically used as translation for the English term \"child bride.\"\n\nWithin social anthropology research of Chinese marriage, shim-pua marriage is referred to as a \"minor marriage\" because the daughter-in-law joins her future husband's household when both are minors, in contrast to Chinese major marriage, in which the bride joins her husband's household on the day of the wedding. The shim-pua daughter was often adopted into a family who already had a son to whom she would be betrothed, though this was not always the case. Instead, some families adopted a shim-pua daughter prior to having a son, prompted by a traditional belief that adopting a shim-pua would enhance a wife's likelihood of bearing a son. Although the shim-pua daughter joins the household as a child, the marriage would only occur after both had reached puberty. Depending upon the family's socioeconomic status and financial means, the wedding could range from a large banquet on par with a major marriage to a small family ceremony, or in the simplest cases \"a bow to the ancestors and a slight change in the family's sleeping arrangements.\"\n\nShim-pua marriage occurred over a range of socioeconomic classes, but was particularly common among poor and rural families. Among the well to do, marrying a son in a major marriage was prestigious and a display of status, but also costly. In poorer and more rural communities, shim-pua minor marriage was inexpensive and helped to ensure that no matter how poor a family was, their sons would have wives when they reached marrying age, and thus a greater likelihood of producing descendants. In contrast, the high bride price to acquire a bride for a son to wed in a major marriage could be prohibitive, sometimes as much as a year's income for the family. If the family could not afford such a bride for major marriage, this could result in a failure to produce descendants and the end of the family lineage. In contrast, the costs of adopting an infant daughter were low and the costs of raising her as a shim-pua often included only food and clothing. In poor communities, limited wealth or status motivated both the adoption of a shim-pua daughter into the family and the giving up of biological daughters as shim-pua to other families. For a family of limited means or social status, a biological daughter offered little surety; traditionally she would be married off into another family and would neither care for her parents in old age nor extend the family lineage. In contrast, a shim-pua daughter would remain in the household, caring for the parents through their old age, and would bear their descendants. For these reasons, adoption of an infant shim-pua daughter frequently coincided with giving up a biological infant daughter for adoption and then raising the shim-pua daughter in her place.\n\nThese marriages were often unsuccessful. This has been explained as a demonstration of the Westermarck effect.\n\nIn mainland China, the practice was outlawed by the Communist Party of China in 1949.\n\nIn Taiwan, shim-pua marriage fell out of practice by the 1970s due to increased wealth resulting from Taiwan's economic success, making such arrangements unnecessary. One factor that accelerated the demise of shim-pua marriage was the establishment of compulsory public education in Taiwan, which compelled families to send all children, including daughters and adoptive shim-pua daughters to school. Greater exposure outside the home and education itself often created opportunities for shim-pua daughters to resist or escape the marriage arrangement.\n\n\"Zhaozhui\" ( or ) is a related custom by which a wealthy family that lacks an heir might take in a boy child, although such marriages usually involve a procreation-age male. Since these marriages required the husband entering the wife's household (contrary to traditional Chinese norms), they were relegated to a lower social status. During the Qing dynasty, these marriages became increasingly common to maintain inheritance bloodlines. The boy would take on the familial name of his new family, and typically would marry the family's daughter.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "752626", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=752626", "title": "Boerewors", "text": "Boerewors\n\nBoerewors () a type of sausage which originated in South Africa, is an important part of South African cuisine and is popular across Southern Africa. The name is derived from the Afrikaans/Dutch words (\"farmer\") and (\"sausage\"). Boerewors must contain at least 90 percent meat, and always contain beef, as well as lamb, pork, or a mixture of lamb and pork. The other 10% is made up of spices and other ingredients. Not more than 30% of the meat content may be fat. Boerewors may not contain offal or any \"mechanically recovered\" meat pulp (as recovered through a process where meat and bone are mechanically separated).\n\nBoerewors is thought to derive from a form of sausage made south of the Ardour River in France( No evidence available). It is made from coarsely minced beef (sometimes combined with minced pork, lamb, or both) and spices (usually toasted coriander seed, black pepper, nutmeg, cloves and allspice). Like many other forms of sausage, boerewors contains a high proportion of fat, and is preserved with salt and vinegar, and packed in sausage casings. Traditional boerewors is usually formed into a continuous spiral. It is often served with pap (traditional South African porridge / polenta made from mielie-meal). Boerewors is also very common throughout Namibia, Botswana, Mozambique and Zimbabwe as well as with expatriate South and Southern African communities in Australia, New Zealand, Canada, Ireland, the Netherlands, Taiwan, the United Kingdom, and the United States.\n\nOn 3 May 2014, the Guinness World Record for braaing the longest boerewors in the world was broken in South Africa. It measured in length. The boerewors was distributed freely to old-age homes and the Abraham Kriel Orphanage.\n\nBoerewors is most traditionally \"braaied\" (grilled over charcoal), but is often cooked under an electric grill, or baked in an oven, or fried in a pan. When cooking Boerewors, pricking the casing should be avoided at all cost, as doing this will lead to the \"wors\" drying out during preparation. A local variant of the hotdog is the boerewors roll, or \"boerie\", which is a piece of boerewors in a hotdog bun, often served with a tomato, chili and onion relish.\n\nThe many varieties of boerewors include specialties such as garlic wors, \"kameeldoring\" (camel thorn), \"Karoowors\" (sausage from the Karoo region in South Africa), and \"spekwors\" (made with extra cubed pork fat). Other ingredients include cheese and chilli peppers.\n\nA similar sausage may also be made from the meat of different animal species, such as kudu, and springbok, but it may not be sold as boerewors. Instead, it is named after the predominant meat species, but only if it contains at least 75% meat from that specific species. When a sausage is made from different types of game, it may not be labelled boerewors but must be labelled as sausage and with the names of all the game species in it.\n\nBoerewors does not keep well unrefrigerated. A similar dried or cured sausage called droëwors is prepared instead in a process similar to the preparation of biltong. Droëwors has become popular in its own right as a snack.\n\nThe preparation and grilling of boerewors has become a fine art with many local, regional and national competitions taking place. Shoprite, South Africa's largest supermarket chain, hosts an annual competition to determine the best new preparations. The winner of this competition has the privilege of having their product/recipe manufactured and sold in all Shoprite stores nationwide, under the Championship Boerewors brand.\n"}
{"id": "755486", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=755486", "title": "Summer Time in Europe", "text": "Summer Time in Europe\n\nEuropean Summer Time is the variation of standard clock time that is applied in most European countries (apart from Iceland, Georgia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Turkey, and Russia) in the period between spring and autumn, during which clocks are advanced by one hour from the time observed in the rest of the year, in order to make the most efficient use of seasonal daylight. It corresponds to the notion and practice of daylight saving time to be found in many other parts of the world.\n\nIn the EU, EFTA and associated countries, European Summer Time begins at 01:00 UTC/WET (02:00 CET, 03:00 EET) on the last Sunday in March and ends at 01:00 UTC (02:00 WEST, 03:00 CEST, 04:00 EEST) on the last Sunday in October each year; i.e. the change is made at the same absolute time across all time zones. European Union Directive 2000/84/EC makes the observance of summer time mandatory for EU member states (except overseas territories), though a proposal to repeal this directive and require that member states observe their own choice of time year-round from 2021 is currently going through the legislative process .\n\nSummer Time lasts, depending upon the calendar year, for either 30 or 31 weeks of the year.\n\nSummer Time was first introduced during the First World War. However, most countries discontinued the practice after the war. It was then restarted in various countries during the Second World War and its immediate aftermath. Again it was widely cancelled by the 1950s, but reintroduced in isolated cases until the late 1960s, when the energy crisis of the late 1960s and early 1970s began to prompt policymakers to reintroduce Summer Time across the continent. It has remained in place in most European countries since then.\n\nHistorically the countries of Europe had different practices for observing Summer Time, but this hindered coordination of transport, communications, and movements. Starting in 1981 the European Commission began issuing directives requiring member states to legislate harmonised start and end dates for Summer Time.\n\nSince 1981 each directive has specified a transition time of 01:00 UTC and a start date of the last Sunday in March, but the end dates have differed. Successive Directives laid down two dates for the end: one on the last Sunday in September applied by the continental Member States, and the other on the fourth Sunday in October for the United Kingdom and Ireland. In 1996 the end date was changed to the fourth Sunday in October for all countries. In 1998 the end date was changed to the last Sunday in October; this happened to be the same as the previous rule for 1996 and 1997. The ninth directive, Directive 2000/84/EC, currently (2018) in force, specifies this rule.\n\nThere were proposals in 2015 and 2016 from members of the European Parliament to abolish summer time observance, but the European Commission did not at that time put forward proposals to be considered, saying it had not found conclusive evidence in favour of a change, and member states were divided. It did however note that a cost would be incurred if harmonisation between member states' summer time rules was lost. In 2017 the Finnish and Lithuanian parliaments both voted in favour of proposals calling on the EU to reconsider daylight saving, with similar criticism from Poland and Sweden. The European Commission at the time was reviewing the practice.\n\nOn 8 February 2018, the European Parliament voted to ask the European Commission to re-evaluate DST in Europe. After a web survey showing high support for not switching clocks twice annually, on 12 September 2018 the European Commission decided to propose that an end be put to seasonal clock changes (repealing Directive 2000/84/EC). In order for this to be valid, the European Union legislative procedure must be followed, mainly that the Council of the European Union and the European Parliament must both approve the proposal.\n\nUnder the proposal, member countries were expected to decide by 31 March 2019 which time they would observe year round. This was however considered a fairly tight timescale by many. The Internet Assigned Numbers Authority, which coordinates changes to the time zone database used by most computers and smartphones, notes that \"With less than a year's notice there is a good chance that some computer-based clocks will operate incorrectly after the change, due to delays in propagating updates to software and data.\" The airline industry points out the complexity of revising all airline schedules, particularly in terms of ensuring slot availability on flights outside the EU, and recommends keeping the status quo or deferring the change until at least 2021. An informal meeting of EU transport ministers on 29 October 2018 suggested that many member states would not support the \"unrealistic\" timetable and that implementation could be pushed back to 2021.\n\nDiscussions have shown support for year-round \"winter time\" in e.g. Denmark, the Netherlands (), and Finland () while permanent summer time was supported in Portugal (), Poland (), and Cyprus (). Spanish opinion is split on the matter; the mainland largely favours shifting to UTC, while the Balearic Islands would prefer to remain on and the Canary Islands on . The United Kingdom is due to leave the EU before the reform becomes effective; any new EU directive would apply during the transition period (if any) but thereafter the UK could choose to make its own arrangements. If the UK were thus to continue observing summer/winter time, Northern Ireland would have a one-hour time difference for half the year either with the rest of Ireland or with the rest of the UK. The Irish government is to hold a public consultation on the EU proposal; , the UK Government \"has no plans\" to end daylight saving.\n\nOn 4 March 2019, the European Parliament Transport and Tourism Committee approved the Commission's proposal by 23 votes to 11. The start date will however be postponed until 2021 to ensure a smooth transition and the Commission must ensure that countries' decisions to retain winter or summer time are coordinated and do not disrupt the internal market. This decision was confirmed by the full European Parliament on 26 March; it must now be approved by the Council of Ministers. Under the draft directive, member states would be able to choose whether to remain on their current summer time, in which case the last transition would be on the last Sunday of March 2021, or their current winter time, which would take permanent effect from the last Sunday of October 2021.\n\nEuropean Summer Time begins (clocks go forward) at 01:00 UTC on the last Sunday in March, and ends (clocks go back) at 01:00 UTC on the last Sunday in October:\nA formula which can be used to calculate the beginning of European Summer Time is:\n\nSunday (31 − ((((5 × \"y\") ÷ 4) + 4) mod 7)) March at 01:00 UTC\n\nThe corresponding formula for the end of European Summer Time is:\n\nSunday (31 − ((((5 × \"y\") ÷ 4) + 1) mod 7)) October at 01:00 UTC\n\nwhere \"y\" is the year, and \"a\" mod \"b\" is \"b\" times the fractional part of \"a\"/\"b\". These formulae are valid until 2099.\n\n\"Double Summer Time\" (two hours ahead of local winter time) has been observed on some occasions, notably in 1921, 1941-45, and 1947. See:\n\nThere are four countries that do not use summer time, but keep the same time all year.\n\nSome may be thought of as using \"permanent\" summer time, since they use time zones allocated to regions further east than themselves. Belarus explicitly decided to stay permanently on (what it formerly called) summer time after 2011.\n\nSpain, France, Belgium, and the Netherlands may also be thought of as observing \"summer time\" throughout the winter, and \"double-summer time\" during summer, because of their positions to the west of the central European time zone.\n\n\nIn most of Europe, the word \"Summer\" is added to the name of each European time zone during this period: thus, in the time zone, Central European Time becomes Central European Summer Time ().\n\nAustria used summer time in 1916–1918, 1920, 1940–1948 (as part of Nazi Germany between 1940–1945), and since 1980. \n\nAustria-Hungary used summer time during World War I in 1916, 1917, and 1918, in line with the German Empire.\n\nSummer time was introduced in Bulgaria in 1979 by a regulation of the Bulgarian Council of Ministers. Bulgaria observes the European Union rules for summer time.\n\nIn the Kingdom of Bohemia summer time was used for three seasons during World War I, from 1916 to 1918, while part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire. \n\nDuring World War II, when the Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia became a de facto part of Nazi Germany, summer time was used from 1940. In 1940/1941 and 1941/1942, the summer time was kept continuously even during the winter. \n\nCzech Republic continued to use summer time after the dissolution of Czechoslovakia in 1993.\n\nCzechoslovakia used summer time from 1945 to 1949 and from 1979 to 1992. In winter 1946/1947 (from 1 December to 23 February), winter time (CET−01:00) was used.\n\nSummer time has been observed in Denmark since 1980. A national association against summer time (Landsforeningen mod Sommertid) exists, which celebrated the EU commission preliminary decision in August 2018.\n\nIn Estonia summer time was not used in 1989–1996 and 2000–2001. It was used under Soviet rule in 1981–1988.\n\nThe Faroe Islands has observed summer time since 1981. The islands have never been part of the EU, so the decision to observe summer time was its own.\n\nIn Finland, summer time has been used on a regular basis since 1981.\n\nA citizens' initiative to abolish daylight saving time was signed by 70,000 Finnish citizens. It was presented to the Finnish parliament in June 2017.\n\nFrance and Monaco follow Central European Time and Central European Summer Time. They apply EU rules regarding the start and end times and dates for summer time.\n\nFrom 1923 until the Second World War, France and Monaco observed summer time from the last Saturday in March until the first Saturday in October. During the Second World War France also observed summer time. However, after the war the practice was abandoned (since the country changed time zones instituting \"de facto\" permanent summer time). In 1975, summer time was reimplemented because of the oil crisis.\n\nSince is France's \"natural\" time zone (extreme points correspond to UTC-0:20 to UTC+0:38), its use of in winter could be seen as a form of daylight saving time, while its use of Central European Summer Time () in summer can be seen as a form of \"double summer time\".\n\nSummer time was first introduced during World War I by the German Empire from 1916 to 1918. After the end of the war and the proclamation of the Weimar Republic in November 1918, summer time ceased to be observed. Summer time was reintroduced in 1940, during World War II, to try to save energy for the war economy. After the defeat of Germany, summer time was retained by the occupation powers. In 1945, Berlin and the Soviet Occupation Zone even observed Central European Midsummer Time (\"Mitteleuropäische Hochsommerzeit\", \"MEHSZ\"; ): in 1947, all of Germany switched to midsummer time from 11 May to 29 June. After the Federal Republic (West Germany) and the German Democratic Republic (East Germany) were established in 1949, summer time again ceased to be observed in 1950.\n\nIn 1978, West Germany decided to reintroduce summer time, following the example set by several neighbouring states in the aftermath of the 1973 oil crisis. However, it only came into effect in 1980, after West and East Germany reached an agreement to observe summer time simultaneously from the last Sunday in March (02:00 CET) to the last Sunday in September (03:00 CEST). Thus both German states observed the same time until the German reunification in 1990, after which the reunified Germany retained the laws and thus also the Time Act (\"Zeitgesetz\") of West Germany.\n\nAfter 1980, West and East Germany; since 1991 reunified Germany: Central European Summer Time.\n\nBüsingen am Hochrhein, a small exclave of Germany entirely surrounded by Swiss territory, did not implement summer time in 1980 but observed the same time as Switzerland; thus there was a one hour time difference between this village and the rest of Germany. For the tz database, the zone Europe/Busingen was created in its 2013a release, because since the Unix time epoch in 1970, Büsingen am Hochrhein has shared clocks with Zurich, but not with Germany every year.\n\nGermany follows the EU rules regarding the start and end times and dates for summer time.\n\nPart of the Kingdom of Denmark, Greenland observes Summer Time simultaneously with Europe. Summer Time thus begins at 00:00 East Greenland Time on Sunday, and 22:00 West Greenland Time on Saturday, and ends at 01:00 EGST on Sunday and 23:00 WGST on Saturday. It was introduced in 1980 when Greenland was legally a part of Denmark without local rule. The most other EU Overseas countries and territories do not observe summer time. Exceptions, based on company decisions, are the northeastern coast around Danmarkshavn (UTC year-round) for Thule Air Base (which follows Atlantic Time and observes in accordance with US and Canadian rules)\n\nSummer time was first introduced in Hungary in 1916, and it was observed until 1919. After that, summer time was in use between 1941–1949 and 1954–1957. Summer time has been in use again since 1980 and follows EU rules.\n\nIceland uses but has not used summer time since April 1968. From 1908 to 1968 Iceland used . Summer time was used in 1917-1919, 1921 and 1939-1967.\n\nIn the Republic of Ireland, Irish Standard Time (IST) (UTC+01, Western European Summer Time) is observed during Summer (March to October). IST is sometimes mistaken for \"Irish Summer Time\", though this is incorrect. Winter Time (UTC+00, WET is observed in the rest of the year.\n\n(Northern Ireland, as part of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, observes UK time. , this is the same as the rest of Ireland).\n\nSummer time is known as \"ora legale\" (literally \"legal hour\", referencing the fact that it is mandated by law) in Italy, and it has been adopted and abolished several times: it was observed from 1916 to 1920 and between 1944 and 1948. A law was approved in 1965 that took effect the following year, and made the application of summer time mandatory in the whole country. Since 1996, it has been coordinated with the European Union. San Marino and Vatican City State share land borders solely with Italy and observe the same time as in Italy.\n\nThe Netherlands did not use a standardised time until 1909, when Amsterdam Time was introduced. Amsterdam time was 19 minutes and 32 seconds ahead of GMT (Greenwich Meridian time). Later this was corrected to GMT+00:20 for the sake of simpicity.\n\nIn 1940 the German occupants forced the Netherlands to observe CEST, Germany's Daylight Saving Time, effectively advancing its timezone by one hour and 40 minutes. This time stayed in effect year round until 1942, when the normal clock followed the German DST switches.\n\nThe use of DST was abandoned directly after the war, and not observed again until 1977, when summer time was observed again, which it currently still is.\n\nIn Norway, summer time was observed in 1916, 1940–45, and 1959-65. The arrangement was controversial, and in 1965 the Norwegian parliament (Stortinget) voted to discontinue the practice. Their neighbour, Sweden, did not use it.\n\nHowever, in 1980 summer time was reintroduced (together with Sweden and Denmark), and since at least 2002 Norway has followed the European Union in this matter.\n\nIn Poland, \"the summer time\" was observed in the following years:\nIn the years 1979 - 1995 the last day of summer time was the last Saturday of September. In 1996 it was changed to the last Saturday of October, to synchronise with other countries of the EU.\n\nMost of Portugal operates Western European Time and Western European Summer Time. \n\nSummer time (locally known by \"Hora de Verão\") was introduced in 1916. In the years 1922, 1923, 1925, 1930, 1933, 1950 and from 1966 to 1976 summer time was not applied.\n\nFor many years, the official time in Madeira was one hour later than that in Lisbon, and the Azores were two hours behind. Today in Madeira, the official time is the same as that of Lisbon and, in the Azores, it is one hour behind Lisbon. The start and end dates for summer time in Portugal follow the pattern in the rest of the EU..\n\nSummer time in Romania (locally known by \"Ora de Vară\") was originally introduced in 1932 (between 22 May and 2 October). Between 1933 and 1940 summer time started on the first Sunday in April and ended on the first Sunday in October. Summer time was abandoned in 1941 and reintroduced in 1979. Until 1996, with few exceptions, summer time in Romania follows European Union rules.\n\nA decree of the Russian Provisional Government introduced summer time () in Russia on 30 June 1917, and clocks moved one hour forward. A decree of the Soviet government led to the abandonment of this system five months later: clocks moved one hour back again on 28 December.\n\nFrom 1930, Decree time had the effect of imposing year-round time-zone advances in the Soviet Union.\n\nA decision of the Council of Ministers of the USSR reintroduced summer time in the USSR (Moscow Summer Time, for example) on 1 April 1981, and its practice continued into post-Soviet times until 2011. The changeover dates in Russia were the same as for other European countries, but clocks were moved forward or back at 02:00 local time in all zones. Thus in Moscow (local time = in winter, in summer), summer time commenced at 02:00 UTC on the day before the last Sunday in March, and ended at 03:00 UTC on the day before the last Sunday in October. (Note that \"day before the last Sunday\" is not the same as \"the last Saturday\" in a month where the last day is a Saturday.)\nOn 8 February 2011, Russian President Dmitry Medvedev announced cancellation of biannual clock changes in Russia in favor of a permanent switch to summer time. An hour was added in March 2011 for the last time, and clocks did not move back again. At the same time some of Russia's time zones were consolidated. After this reform many Russian cities had a \"standard time\" two hours more than would be suggested by their \"astronomical time\" (because the original standard time was already ahead of astronomical time in many areas).\n\nDuring his 2012 election campaign, Vladimir Putin proposed re-introducing summer time, as some workers had complained about not seeing any daylight during the winter, since the sun had not risen when they went to work. According to a report in the \"International Herald Tribune\", Russian citizens remembered the winter of 2011-12 as the \"darkest winter on record\" as a result of the time change. However, Putin later said it would be up to then Prime Minister Medvedev's cabinet to decide how to proceed with a seasonal time shift, and it decided to stay with the 2011 policy.\n\nOn 26 October 2014 Russia permanently returned to \"winter\" time.\n\nSlovakia used summer time (locally known as \"Letný čas\") in 1916, 1917, and 1918, as part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, then in the early 1940s, as part of Nazi Germany, and annually since 1979, as part of Czechoslovakia. \n\nAfter several years, Slovakia established the rule that summer time begins in the last weekend of March (during the night from Saturday to Sunday) and ends in the last weekend of September. \n\nAfter the dissolution of Czechoslovakia in 1993, Slovakia continued to use summer time. Since 1996, summer time has been prolonged about one month so it lasts until the last weekend in October, in accordance with European Union rules.\n\nSummer time in Slovenia (locally known as \"Poletni čas\") was introduced on 16 November 1982 when it was one of the Yugoslavia republics. Same law was valid until 1996 when the end of summer time was changed from first Sunday in October to last Sunday in October. In 2006, the European Union standard was adopted and is still used today.\n\nSpain including the Canary Islands has summer time, applying EU rules regarding the start and end times and dates.\n\nIn 1918 Spain observed summer time for the first time, and then introduced and abolished several times. It was abolished autumn 1949, and then reintroduced 1974 and has been used since. Spain used before 1940 and from 1940 as standard time. The Canary Islands used before 1946 and since 1946 as standard time.\n\nSince is Spain's \"natural\" time zone (extreme points except Canary Islands correspond to UTC-0:37 to UTC+0:17), its use of in winter could be seen as a form of daylight saving time, while its use of Central European Summer Time () in summer can be seen as a form of \"double summer time\".\n\nIn Sweden summer time was originally introduced on 15 May 1916. It proved unpopular, and on 30 September in the same year, Sweden returned to year-round standard time. This continued for more than half a century.\n\nOn 6 April 1980, Sweden again introduced summer time, and since then summer time has been observed every summer in Sweden. Except for the introduction year 1980, summer time has always started on the last Sunday in March. It ended on the last Sunday in September during the years 1980-1995, and has ended on the last Sunday in October since 1996, following a unification of start/end dates of summer time within the EU as well as in several European countries then outside the EU.\n\nThe transit authority Västtrafik changes its clocks at 04:00, so that the last tram that leaves around 3:30 actually goes 2:30 on the last weekend of October for those who have changed their clocks at the legal time. The public transport company SL changes their clocks at the legal time, and runs extra departures during the October transition hour.\n\nThe last country in Europe to adopt summer time, in 1981, was Switzerland, even though summer time had been rejected by 52.1% of voters in a federal referendum in 1978.\nSince 1996, Swiss summer time has followed EU regulations. It had formerly been in use in 1941 and 1942. Liechtenstein observes the same time as Switzerland. The German village of Büsingen am Hochrhein, a small exclave, entirely surrounded by Swiss territory, also observes the same time as in Switzerland; it did not implement summer time in 1980, and observed the same time as Switzerland, so that there was a one hour time difference between this village and the rest of Germany.\n\nSummer time was introduced in Turkey in 1947, but suspended from 1965 to 1972. Since 1974, Turkey follows European Summer Time.\n\nIn 2008, the Turkish Ministry of Energy proposed that Turkey should abolish summer time while at the same time switching to , originally from 2009 onwards, but when this appeared infeasible, to start in 2011, the plan has not been heard of since.\n\nFor the year 2011, Turkey switched to European Summer Time at 3:00 am (03:00) on Monday 28 March, one day later than the rest of Europe, to avoid disrupting the national university entrance examinations held on 27 March.\n\nOnce again, for the year 2014, Turkey switched to European Summer Time at 3:00 am (03:00) on Monday 31 March, one day later than the rest of Europe, to avoid disrupting the local elections held on 30 March.\n\nIn 2015, Turkey delayed the switch from European Summer Time by 2 weeks, to 4:00 am (04:00) on Sunday 8 November, two weeks later than the rest of Europe, due to the calling of a snap general election on Sunday, 1 November.\n\nIn 2016, Turkey scrapped winter time, by switching to New Turkey Time. This means permanent , which was used during summer time in Turkey. The switch was on 12:00 am (00:00) on Thursday 8 September, in reality stopping switches between summer and winter time.\n\nSummer time was introduced in Ukraine in the early 1980s; from 1981 till 1989 this was Moscow Summer Time; since 1992 Eastern European Summer Time has been used.\n\nOn 20 September 2011 the Verkhovna Rada (Ukrainian parliament) voted not to return from Eastern European Summer Time to Eastern European Time. This change would have had the effect of moving Ukraine into the Further-eastern European Time zone along with Belarus and western Russia (which do not observe summer time). However, on 18 October 2011 the Parliament canceled these plans and the country returned to Eastern European Time as scheduled. 295 MPs voted in favour out of 349 registered MPs.\n\nCrimea and regions of eastern Ukraine under the control of pro-Russian separatists observe Further-eastern European Time.\n\nIn the United Kingdom, local time during this period is known as \nBritish Summer Time (BST) (, WEST) while local time during the rest of the year is normally referred to as Greenwich Mean Time (GMT), (, WET). \n\nLegislation: Summer Time Act 1916; Summer Time Act 1922; Time (Ireland) Act, 1916; Summer Time Act, 1925; Emergency Powers (Defence) Act, 1939; The Summer Time Order 1964; The Summer Time Order 1967; Summer Time Act 1972; The Summer Time Order 1997; The Summer Time Order 2002.\n\nSince 1996 all clocks in the European Union, of which the UK is a member state, have changed on same dates and at the same time, at 01:00 UTC (Thus summer time ends at 01:59:59 ).\n\nThe Channel Islands and Isle of Man observe the same time as the UK. Gibraltar uses the same time as Spain.\n"}
{"id": "757967", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=757967", "title": "Plymouth Gin", "text": "Plymouth Gin\n\nPlymouth Gin used to be Protected Geographical Indication that pertains to any gin distilled in Plymouth, England, but since February 2015 it isn't. Today, there is but one brand, \"Plymouth\", which is produced by the Black Friars Distillery. The Black Friars Distillery is the only remaining gin distillery in Plymouth, in what was once a Dominican Order monastery built in 1431, and opens onto what is now Southside Street. It has been in operation since 1793. \n\nThe established distilling business of Fox & Williamson began the distilling of the Plymouth brand in 1793. Soon, the business was to become known as Coates & Co., which it remained until March 2004. In 1996, the brand was sold by Allied-Lyons to a management group headed by Charles Rolls who reinvigorated it. After turning the company around, they sold it in 2005 to the Swedish company V&S Group, who also made Absolut Vodka. The brand is now owned and distributed by the French company Pernod Ricard as a result of its purchase of V&S in 2008.\n\nThe Plymouth Original Strength brand of gin is 41.2% ABV. It is different and slightly less dry than the much more common London style of gin, purportedly due to a higher than usual proportion of root ingredients, which bring a more 'earthy' feel to the gin as well as a softened juniper flavour. There is also a 'navy strength' variety which is 57% ABV (100° English proof), being the traditional strength demanded by the British Royal Navy.\n<ref name=\"http://www.plymouthgin.com\"></ref>\nA 47% ABV (94 U.S. proof) version is distributed worldwide.\n\nPlymouth also produces a sloe gin, but has discontinued its Fruit cups and Damson liqueur.\n\nGin, originally being a relatively cheap alcoholic beverage, was bought by the poor and caused considerable social problems, illustrated by the engraving 'Gin Lane' by Hogarth in 1751. The global deployment of the British Royal Navy led to the renown and wide consumption of the product as unlike London gin, it could be taken neat. In British India, it was mixed with the tonic water consumed for the anti-malarial properties of quinine, which led to the creation of the Gin and Tonic.\n\nPlymouth Gin was very popular in the first part of the 20th century. 23 gin based cocktail recipes in the Savoy book of cocktails name Plymouth Gin specifically. It was a tradition in the Royal Navy that all newly commissioned vessels receive a \"Plymouth Gin Commissioning kit\", a wooden box containing two bottles of navy strength Plymouth gin and glassware.\n\nPlymouth Gin is traditionally used in the historic Sailor's celebratory drink Mahogany composed of gin beaten into warmed black treacle.\n\nIn 1998, the brand was relaunched by the new management team. The new packaging involved a re-creation of the original bottle and included a thirsty monk inside the bottle. It was said that when the monk's feet 'got dry', it was time for a new bottle. It was also restored to its original strength of 41.2%, and a Navy Strength of 57% introduced to remind drinkers that the brand was the official gin for the British Royal Navy. \n\nIn mid-2006, the bottle was changed by new owners V&S to an Art Deco style. The front of the bottle depicted the ship, \"Mayflower\", based upon the fact that when the Pilgrim Fathers set out for their journey to the new world, bad sea conditions and damage forced them to put into Plymouth harbour for shelter and essential repairs. Local tradition has it that some of them stayed in the monastery, which later became the distillery. In the same way as the monk's feet, one can say it is time to get a new bottle when the \"Mayflower\" 'no longer sails on gin'.\n\nIn January 2012, the packaging was again redesigned, this time returning to a more classical \"shaving bottle\" shape with a slightly green tint and the words \"Est. 1793 / Black Friars Distillery\" embossed on the front.\n\nPlymouth's Original Gin has won many awards over the years, including four double gold, four gold, one silver, and two bronze medals at the San Francisco World Spirits Competition between 2006-2016. In 2016, Plymouth received double gold for its Plymouth Gin (Original Gin) and gold for its Navy Strength Gin in this competition.\n"}
{"id": "759435", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=759435", "title": "Johnnie Walker", "text": "Johnnie Walker\n\nJohnnie Walker is a brand of Scotch whisky now owned by Diageo that originated in the Scottish town of Kilmarnock, East Ayrshire. The brand was first established by grocer John Walker. It is the most widely distributed brand of blended Scotch whisky in the world, sold in almost every country, with annual sales of the equivalent of over 223.7 million 700 ml bottles in 2016 (156.6 million litres).\n\nWhen John Walker, born on 25 July 1805, lost his farmer father in 1819, the family sold the farm and their trustees invested the proceeds, £417, in an Italian warehouse, grocery, and wine and spirits shop on the High Street in Kilmarnock, Ayrshire, Scotland. Walker managed the grocery, wine and spirits segment as a teenager in 1820. The Excise Act of 1823 relaxed strict laws on distillation of whisky and reduced, by a considerable amount, the extremely heavy taxes on the distillation and sale of whisky. By 1825, Walker, a teetotaller, was selling spirits, including rum, brandy, gin and whisky.\n\nIn short order, he switched to dealing mainly in whisky. Since blending of grain and malt whiskies was still banned, he was selling both blended malt whiskies and grain whiskies. They were sold as made-to-order whiskies, blended to meet specific customer requirements, because he did not have any brand of his own. He began using his name on labels years later, selling a blended malt as \"Walker's Kilmarnock Whisky\". John Walker died in 1857.\n\nThe brand became popular, but after Walker's death it was his son Alexander ‘Alec’ Walker and grandson Alexander Walker II who were largely responsible for establishing the whisky as a favoured brand. The Spirits Act of 1860 legalised the blending of grain whiskies with malt whiskies and ushered in the modern era of blended Scotch whisky. Andrew Usher of Edinburgh, Scotland, was the first to capitalise on blended Scotch whisky, a more accessible whisky that was lighter and sweeter in character, making it much more marketable to a wider audience, followed by the Walkers in due course.\n\nAlexander Walker had introduced the brand's signature square bottle in 1860. This meant more bottles fitting the same space and fewer broken bottles. The other identifying characteristic of the Johnnie Walker bottle was – and still is – the label, which, since that year, is applied at an angle of 24 degrees upwards left to right and allows text to be made larger and more visible. This also allowed consumers to identify it at a distance. One major factor in his favour was the arrival of a railway in Kilmarnock, carrying goods to merchant ships travelling the world. Thanks to Alec's business acumen, sales of Walker's Kilmarnock reached 100,000 gallons (450,000 litres) per year by 1862.\n\nIn 1865, Alec created Johnnie Walker's first commercial blend and called it \"Old Highland Whisky\", before registering it as such in 1867.\n\nUnder John Walker, whisky sales represented eight percent of the firm's income; by the time Alexander was ready to pass on the company to his own sons, that figure had increased to between 90 and 95 percent.\n\nIn 1893, Cardhu distillery was purchased by the Walkers to reinforce the stocks of one of the Johnnie Walker blends' key malt whiskies. This move took the Cardhu single malt out of the market and made it the exclusive preserve of the Walkers. Cardhu's output was to become the heart of the \"Old Highland Whisky\" and, subsequent to the rebranding of 1909, the prime single malt in Johnnie Walker Red and Black Labels.\n\nFrom 1906 to 1909, John's grandsons George and Alexander II expanded the line and had three blended whiskies in the market, \"Old Highland\" at 5 years old, \"Special Old Highland\" at 9 years old, and \"Extra Special Old Highland\" at 12 years old. These three brands had the standard Johnnie Walker labels, the only difference being their colour, White, Red and Black respectively; they were commonly being referred to in public by the colour of their labels. In 1909, as part of a rebranding that saw the introduction of the Striding Man, a mascot used to the present day that was created by cartoonist Tom Browne, the company re-branded their blends to match the common colour names. The Old Highland was renamed \"Johnnie Walker White Label\", and made a 6 year old, the Special Old Highland became \"Johnnie Walker Red Label\" at 10 years old, and \"Extra Special Old Highland\" was renamed \"Johnnie Walker Black Label\" remaining 12 years old.\n\nSensing an opportunity for their brands in terms of expansion of scale and variety, The Walker company became a shareholder in Coleburn Distillery in 1915, quickly followed by Clynelish Distillery Co. and Dailuaine- Talisker Co. in 1916. This ensured a steady supply of the output from the Cardhu, Coleburn, Clynelish, Talisker and Dailuaine distilleries. In 1923, John Walker & Sons bought Mortlach distillery, in furtherance of their strategy. Most of their output was used in Johnnie Walker blends, whose burgeoning popularity required increasingly vast volumes of single malts.\n\nJohnnie Walker White was dropped during World War I. In 1932, Alexander II added \"Johnnie Walker Swing\" to the line, the name originating from the unusual shape of the bottle, which allowed it to rock back and forth.\n\nThe company joined Distillers Company in 1925. Distillers Company was acquired by Guinness in 1986, and Guinness merged with Grand Metropolitan to form Diageo in 1997. That year saw the introduction of the blended malt, Johnnie Walker Pure Malt, renamed as Johnnie Walker Green Label in 2004.\n\nWhen the brand's owners, Diageo, announced its decision in 2009 to close all operations in the town of Kilmarnock, it met with backlash from local people, local politics and then First Minister of Scotland, Alex Salmond. Despite petitions, public campaigns and a large-scale march around Kilmarnock, Diageo continued to forge ahead with the closure. The Johnnie Walker plant in Kilmarnock closed its doors in March 2012.\n\nFor most of its history Johnnie Walker only offered a few blends. Since the turn of the century, there has been a spate of special and limited bottlings.\n\n\n\nEvery type of Johnnie Walker scotch has had a label colour till 2017, except for the Swing label. The purpose is to supposedly denominate the different types of scotch and to position them to be used for different occasions. For example, Johnnie Walker Blue Label is rare and expensive, and so it is intended to be used for special occasions.\n\nThe Walkers created their primary marketing strategy in 1908 with advertisements featuring Browne's Striding Man, using the slogan, \"Johnnie Walker: Born 1820, still going strong\". Photographs replaced the drawings in the 1930s and the Striding Man was miniaturised to a coloured logo in 1939; it first appeared on the Johnnie Walker labels in 1960. In the late 1990s, the direction of the Striding Man was reversed as part of a \"Keep Walking\" campaign. The Striding Man icon was most recently redrawn in 2015.\n\nIn 2009, the advertising agency Bartle Bogle Hegarty (BBH) created a new short film, starring Robert Carlyle and directed by Jamie Rafn, titled \"The Man Who Walked Around the World\", which outlined the history of the Johnnie Walker brand.\n\nJohnnie Walker also launched the international John Walker & Sons Voyager tour in order to market its higher variants in the Asia-Pacific, Europe and Caribbean markets. The Voyager tour was developed in order to promote the special edition Odyssey blend and pay tribute to the original trade routes and sea voyages by which Johnnie Walker was distributed throughout the world.\n\nIn October 2018, Diageo teamed with the HBO to produce the White Walker by Johnnie Walker whisky, inspired by the army of the undead in the hugely popular TV series \"Game of Thrones\", ahead of the series' eighth and final season that was to be aired in April 2019. Diageo earlier launched a collection of \"Game of Thrones\"-inspired single malt scotches in November 2018.\n\nJohnnie Walker spirits have received strong scores at international spirit ratings competitions and from liquor review bodies. The Green Label received a string of three double gold medals from the San Francisco World Spirits Competition between 2005 and 2007. The Gold Label received double gold medals from the San Francisco competition in 2008 and 2009 and won a gold in 2010. Spirits ratings aggregator proof66.com, which averages scores from the San Francisco Spirits Competition, Wine Enthusiast, and others, puts the Black, Blue, Gold and Green Labels in its highest performance category (\"Tier 1\" Spirits).\nJohnnie Walker spirits have several times taken part in the Monde Selection's World Quality Selections and have received a Gold and Grand Gold Quality Award. Johnnie Walker was voted India's Most Trusted Premium Whisky Brand according to the Brand Trust Report 2014, a study conducted by Trust Research Advisory. Johnnie Walker Gold Label Reserve won the World's Best Blended -- Best Scotch Blended in World Whiskies Awards 2018. \n\nJohnnie Walker is the official whisky of Formula One, and are a sponsor of two F1 teams McLaren and Racing Point. Johnnie Walker sponsored the Johnnie Walker Classic, an Asia-Pacific golf tournament, up to 2009 and the Johnnie Walker Championship at Gleneagles, a golf tournament in Scotland up to 2013. Diageo sold the Gleneagles Hotel and Golf Course, the site of the tournament, mid-2015 to focus on its core business.\n\nWinston Churchill's favourite whisky was Johnnie Walker Red Label, which he mixed with water and drank throughout the day. \n\n\"Vanity Fair\" writer Christopher Hitchens was partial to Johnnie Walker Black Label, and referred to it as \"Mr Walker's Amber Restorative\".\n\nJohnnie Walker Blue Label was a favourite of the late US president Richard Nixon, who used to enjoy it with ginger ale and a wedge of lime.\n\nA number of singers and songwriters have referenced Johnnie Walker in their works, from Amanda Marshall to ZZ Top. Elliott Smith's Oscar-nominated \"Miss Misery\" has the narrator \"[making] it through the day with some help from Johnnie Walker Red.\" Heavy metal band Black Label Society was named after Johnnie Walker Black Label whisky, as Zakk Wylde was very fond of the drink.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "762763", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=762763", "title": "Baked potato", "text": "Baked potato\n\nA baked potato, or jacket potato, is a potato that has been baked for eating. When well cooked, a baked potato has a fluffy interior and a crisp skin. It may be served with fillings and condiments such as butter, cheese, sour cream, gravy or even ground meat.\nPotatoes can be baked in a conventional gas or electric oven, a convection oven, a microwave oven, on a barbecue grill, or on/in an open fire. Some restaurants use special ovens designed specifically to cook large numbers of potatoes, then keep them warm and ready for service.\n\nPrior to cooking, the potato should be scrubbed clean, washed and dried with eyes and surface blemishes removed, and basted with oil (usually olive oil) or butter and/or salt. Pricking the potato with a fork or knife allows steam to escape during the cooking process. Potatoes cooked in a microwave oven without pricking the skin might split open due to built up internal pressure from unvented steam. It takes between one and two hours to bake a large potato in a conventional oven at . Microwaving takes from six to twelve minutes depending on oven power and potato size, but does not generally produce a crisp skin. Some recipes call for use of both a microwave and a conventional oven, with the microwave being used to vent most of the steam prior to the cooking process.\n\nSome varieties of potato such as Russet and King Edward potatoes are more suitable for baking than others, owing to their size and consistency.\n\nWrapping the potato in aluminium foil before cooking in a standard oven will help to retain moisture, while leaving it unwrapped will result in a crisp skin. When cooking over an open fire or in the coals of a barbecue, it may require wrapping in foil to prevent burning of the skin. A potato buried directly in coals of a fire cooks very nicely, with a mostly burned and inedible skin. A baked potato is fully cooked when its internal temperature reaches .\n\nOnce a potato has been baked, some people discard the skin and eat only the softer and moister interior, while others enjoy the taste and texture of the crisp skin, which is rich in dietary fiber. Potatoes baked in their skins may lose between 20 and 40% of their vitamin C content because heating in air is slow and vitamin inactivation can continue for a long time. Small potatoes bake more quickly than large ones and therefore retain more of their vitamin C.\nDespite the popular misconception that potatoes are fattening, baked potatoes can be used as part of a healthy diet.\n\nSome people bake their potatoes and then scoop out the interior, leaving the skin as a shell. The white interior flesh can then be mixed with various other food items such as cheese, butter, or bacon bits. This mixture is then spooned back into the skin shells and they are replaced in the oven to warm through. In America these are known variously as loaded potato skins, filled potatoes and twice baked potatoes. In Great Britain, toppings or fillings tend to be more varied than they are in America: baked beans, curried chicken, tuna, and prawn fillings are popular, and in Scotland even haggis is used as a filling for jacket potatoes.\n\nA variation is \"Hasselback potatoes\", where the potato is cut into very thin slices almost down the bottom, so that the potato still holds together, and is then baked in the oven, occasionally scalloped with cheese. The proper noun \"Hasselback\" refers to the luxurious Hasselbacken hotel and restaurant in Stockholm which originated this dish.\n\nMany restaurants serve baked potatoes with sides such as butter, sour cream, chives, shredded cheese, and bacon bits. These potatoes can be a side item to a steak dinner, or some similar entree. Sides are usually optional and customers can order as many or as few as they wish.\n\nLarge, stuffed baked potatoes may be served as an entree, usually filled with meat in addition to any of the ingredients mentioned above. Barbecued or smoked meat or chili is substituted. Vegetables such as broccoli may also be added.\n\nIdaho is the major producing state of potatoes. The Idaho baked potato was heavily promoted by the Northern Pacific Railroad in the early 20th century, often using Hollywood movie stars.\n\nHazen Titus was appointed as the Northern Pacific Railway's dining car superintendent in 1908. He talked to Yakima Valley farmers who complained that they were unable to sell their potato crops because their potatoes were simply too large. They fed them to hogs. Titus learned that a single potato could weigh from two to five pounds, but that smaller potatoes were preferred by the end buyers of the vegetable and that many considered them not to be edible because their thick, rough skin made them difficult to cook.\n\nTitus and his staff discovered the \"inedible\" potatoes were delicious after baking in a slow oven. He contracted to purchase as many potatoes as the farmers could produce that were more than two pounds in weight. Soon after the first delivery of \"Netted Gem Bakers\", they were offered to diners on the North Coast Limited beginning in 1909. Word of the line's specialty offering traveled quickly, and before long it was using \"the Great Big Baked Potato\" as a slogan to promote the railroad's passenger service. When an addition was built for the Northern Pacific's Seattle commissary in 1914, reporter wrote, \"A large trade mark, in the shape of a baked potato, 40 ft.long and 18 ft. in diameter, surmounts the roof. The potato is electric lighted and its eyes, through the electric mechanism, are made to wink constantly. A cube of butter thrust into its split top glows intermittently.\" Premiums such as postcards, letter openers, and spoons were also produced to promote \"The Route of the Great Big Baked Potato\"; the slogan served the Northern Pacific for about 50 years. The song \"Great Big Baked Potato\" (words by N.R. Streeter and H. Caldwell; Music by Oliver George) was written about this potato.\n\nA baked potato is sometimes called a jacket potato in the United Kingdom. The baked potato has been popular in the UK for many years. In the mid-19th century, jacket potatoes were sold on the streets by hawkers during the autumn and winter months. In London, it was estimated that some 10 tons of baked potatoes were sold each day by this method.\nCommon jacket potato fillings (or \"toppings\") in the United Kingdom include cheese and beans, tuna mayonnaise, chili con carne and chicken and bacon.\n\nBaked potatoes are often eaten on Guy Fawkes Night; traditionally they were often baked in the glowing embers of a bonfire.\n\nAs part of the upsurge for more healthy fast food, the baked potato has again taken to the streets of the UK both in mobile units and restaurants. The fast-food chain Spudulike specialises in baked potatoes.\n\nA baked potato is called \"pomme de terre au four\" in French. It may be served as an accompaniment to a meat dish, or, in a fast-food restaurant called a \"pataterie\", be the centre of a meal.\n\nA regional variation of the baked potato is known in rural Armenian villages surrounding Lake Sevan as \"p'ur\" (). Dried cow dung is stacked and used as fuel to slowly bake unseasoned potatoes which are placed in the center. \n\n\"Kumpir\", a baked potato with various fillings, is a popular fast food in Turkey. In its basic form, it is made with potatoes that are wrapped with foil and baked in special ovens. The potatoes are cut straight down the middle and the insides are mixed with unsalted butter and puréed with kaşar cheese. However, all sorts of foods can be added to the potato: mayonnaise, ketchup, pickles, sweetcorn, sausage slices, carrots, mushrooms and Russian salad. The cafés in Ortaköy, Istanbul make \"kumpir\" that are especially popular with the tourists and offer even more ingredients.\n\nAlthough baked potato with various fillings is not considered a traditional Russian dish, it has recently been gaining popularity as a fast food.\n\nThe baked potato is reasonably popular in Brazil, where it is sometimes known as \"batata inglesa\" (literally translated as \"English potato,\" likely due to the use of the English variety of potato, the 'King Edward').\n"}
{"id": "764694", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=764694", "title": "Casserole", "text": "Casserole\n\nA casserole (French: diminutive of \"casse\", from Provençal \"cassa\" \"pan\") is a large, deep pan used both in the oven and as a serving vessel. The word is also used for the food cooked and served in such a vessel, with the cookware itself called a casserole dish or casserole pan. \"Casserole\" should not be confused with the word \"\"cacerola\"\" which is Spanish for \"cooking pot\".\n\nIn the United States and continental Europe casseroles usually consist of pieces of meat (such as chicken) or fish (such as tuna), various chopped vegetables, a starchy binder such as flour, rice, potato or pasta, and often a crunchy or cheesy topping. Liquids are released from the meat and vegetables during cooking, and further liquid in the form of stock, wine, beer (for example \"lapin à la Gueuze\"), gin, cider, or vegetable juice may be added when the dish is assembled. Casseroles are usually cooked slowly in the oven, often uncovered. They may be served as a main course or a side dish, and may be served in the vessel in which they were cooked.\n\nIn the United Kingdom, the Republic of Ireland, Australia, and New Zealand, a casserole is named after its dish, rather than its contents. Casseroles in these countries are very similar to stews. The difference is that once the meat and vegetables are browned on top of the stove, they are then cooked in liquid in the oven in a closed dish, producing meat that is tender and juicy, from long slow cooking. The heat is indirect, so there is less chance of burning.\n\nExamples of casserole include ragout, Lancashire hotpot, cassoulet, tajine, moussaka, shepherd's pie, quiche, timballo, sweet potato pie, and carbonnade. A distinction can be made between casseroles and stews: stewing is a cooking process whereby heat is applied to the bottom of the cooking vessel (typically over a fire or on a stove), whereas casserole is generally baked in an oven, where heat circulates all around the cooking vessel. Casseroles may be cooked covered or uncovered, while braises are typically covered to prevent evaporation.\n\nIn 1866, Elmire Jolicoeur, a French Canadian immigrant, invented the precursor of the modern casserole in Berlin, New Hampshire. The casseroles we know today are a relatively modern invention. Early casserole recipes consisted of rice that was pounded, pressed, and filled with a savoury mixture of meats such as chicken or sweetmeats. Some time around the 1870s this sense of casserole seems to have slipped into its current sense. Cooking in earthenware containers has always been common in most nations, but the idea of casserole cooking as a one-dish meal became popular in the United States in the twentieth century, especially in the 1950s when new forms of lightweight metal and glass cookware appeared on the market. By the 1970s casseroles took on a less-than sophisticated image.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "765228", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=765228", "title": "Demi-glace", "text": "Demi-glace\n\nDemi-glace (English: \"half glaze\") is a rich brown sauce in French cuisine used by itself or as a base for other sauces. The term comes from the French word \"glace\", which, used in reference to a sauce, means \"icing\" or \"glaze\". It is traditionally made by combining one part Espagnole sauce and one part brown stock. The sauce is then reduced by half, strained of any left over impurities and finished with a sherry wine. \n\nCommon variants of demi-glace use a 1:1 mixture of beef or chicken stock to sauce espagnole; these are referred to as \"beef demi-glace\" (\"demi-glace au boeuf\") or \"chicken demi-glace\" (\"demi-glace au poulet\"). The term \"demi-glace\" by itself implies that it is made with the traditional veal stock.\n\nThe basic recipe for demi-glace is provided by the French chef Auguste Escoffier, who is often considered to have established the method of French cooking, as well as codified many standard French recipes. Although many recipes for demi-glace give the preparation for the espagnole first, and then the recipe for the brown stock, preparation should actually proceed in the reverse. \n\nA basic brown stock should be prepared, and when completed, left on the heat to remain very warm. At this point, the espagnole is prepared, and when it is finished, the brown stock is added in equal portions to the espagnole. Demi-glace keeps very well, about six months refrigerated or almost indefinitely frozen.\n\nDue to the considerable effort involved in making the traditional demi-glace, chefs commonly substitute a simple \"jus lié\" of veal stock or to create a simulated version, which the American cookbook author Julia Child referred to as a \"semi-demi-glace\"(i.e. sans espagnole sauce). However, even today, many chefs who prepare French \"haute cuisine\" use a demi-glace prepared in their own kitchen. Concentrates and mixes, mostly available to professional kitchens, are another way of avoiding the labor involved in preparing the sauce.\n\nDemi-glace was humorously featured in popular TV show \"Northern Exposure\", season four, episode \"The Big Feast\". The recipe for the sauce was exaggerated to the point of boiling down the bones of 40 cattle to produce the super-luxurious glace.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "766854", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=766854", "title": "Meat carving", "text": "Meat carving\n\nMeat carving is the process and skill of cutting portions of meat, such as roast and poultry, to obtain a maximum or satisfactory number of meat portions, using a carving knife or meat-slicing machine. A meat carver disjoints the meat and slices in uniform portions. Meat carving is sometimes considered a skill for the private dinner table. \n\n"}
{"id": "767516", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=767516", "title": "Sanzu River", "text": "Sanzu River\n\nThe , or River of Three Crossings, is a Japanese Buddhist tradition and religious belief similar to the Greek concept of the River Styx. It is believed that the dead must cross the river on the way to the afterlife, a belief reflected in Japanese funerals when six coins are placed in the casket with the dead.\n\nThe Sanzu River is popularly believed to be in Mount Osore, a suitably desolate and remote part of Aomori Prefecture in northern Japan.\n\n"}
{"id": "767584", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=767584", "title": "Bouillabaisse", "text": "Bouillabaisse\n\nBouillabaisse (; ) is a traditional Provençal fish stew originating from the port city of Marseille. The French and English form \"bouillabaisse\" comes from the Provençal Occitan word \"bolhabaissa\", a compound that consists of the two verbs \"bolhir\" (to boil) and \"abaissar\" (to reduce heat, i.e., simmer).\n\nBouillabaisse was originally a stew made by Marseille fishermen using the bony rockfish which they were unable to sell to restaurants or markets. There are at least three kinds of fish in a traditional bouillabaisse: typically red rascasse (\"Scorpaena scrofa\"); sea robin (fr: \"grondin\"); and European conger (fr: \"congre\"). It can also include gilt-head bream (fr: \"dorade\"); turbot ((fr: \"turbot\"); monkfish (fr: \"lotte\" or \"baudroie\"); mullet (fr: \"mulet cabot\"); or European hake (fr: \"merlan\"). It usually also includes shellfish and other seafood such as sea urchins (fr: \"oursins\"), mussels (fr: \"moules\"); velvet crabs (fr: \"étrilles\"); spider crab (fr: \"araignées de mer\") or octopus. More expensive versions may add langoustine (Norway lobster), though this was not part of the traditional dish made by Marseille fishermen. Vegetables such as leeks, onions, tomatoes, celery, and potatoes are simmered together with the broth and served with the fish. The broth is traditionally served with a rouille, a mayonnaise made of olive oil, garlic, saffron, and cayenne pepper on grilled slices of bread.\n\nWhat makes a bouillabaisse different from other fish soups is the selection of Provençal herbs and spices in the broth; the use of bony local Mediterranean fish; the way the fish are added one at a time, and brought to a boil; and the method of serving. In Marseille, the broth is served first in a soup plate with slices of bread and rouille, then the fish is served separately on a large platter (see image at right); or, more simply, as Julia Child suggests, the fish and broth are brought to the table separately and served together in large soup plates.\n\nRecipes for bouillabaisse vary from family to family in Marseille, and local restaurants dispute which versions are the most authentic. In some restaurants which cater to foreign tourists, the dish called bouillabaisse has little in common with the original dish except the name.\n\nIn Marseille, bouillabaisse is rarely made for fewer than five people.\n\nAn authentic Marseille bouillabaisse must include \"rascasse\" (\"Scorpaena scrofa\"), a bony rockfish which lives in the calanque and reefs close to shore. It usually also has \"congre\" (eng: European conger) and \"grondin\" (eng: sea robin). According to the \"Michelin Guide Vert\", the four essential elements of a true bouillabaisse are the presence of rascasse, the freshness of the fish; olive oil, and an excellent saffron.\n\nThe American chef and food writer Julia Child, who lived in Marseille for a year, wrote: \"to me the telling flavor of bouillabaisse comes from two things: the Provençal soup base—garlic, onions, tomatoes, olive oil, fennel, saffron, thyme, bay, and usually a bit of dried orange peel—and, of course, the fish—lean (non-oily), firm-fleshed, soft-fleshed, gelatinous, and shellfish.\"\n\nThe ingredients of a traditional Marseille bouillabaisse vary depending upon what fish are available that day and the taste of the chef. These are the typical ingredients used in one of the most traditional Marseille restaurants, the Grand Bar des Goudes on Rue Désirée-Pelleprat:\n\nFour kilograms of fish and shellfish, including, on a typical day, \"grondin\" (English sea robin), \"Rascasse\" (\"Scorpaena scrofa\"), \"rouget grondin\" (red gurnard), \"congre\" (English conger), \"baudroie\" (lotte, or monkfish), \"Saint-Pierre\" (English john dory), \"vive\" (English weever), and sea urchins. Other ingredients in the broth include a kilogram of potatoes, seven cloves of garlic, onions, ripe tomatoes, and a cup of olive oil. The broth is seasoned with a bouquet garni, fennel, eight pistils of saffron, salt and Cayenne pepper.\n\nThe \"rouille\", a spicy mayonnaise which is spread on thick slices of country bread and floated on the bouillabaisse when served, is made with an egg yolk, two cloves of garlic, a cup of olive oil, and ten pistils of saffron, and is seasoned with salt and Cayenne pepper.\n\nIn the traditional bouillabaisse served in Marseille restaurants, first the fish are cleaned and scaled and then washed, usually with sea water. Then the fish are cut into large slices, keeping the bones. Next olive oil is put into a large casserole, and onions, cleaned and sliced, are added, along with crushed garlic and tomatoes, peeled and quartered, without seeds. This mixture is browned at low heat for about five minutes, so that the olive oil takes on the flavors of the other ingredients.\n\nWhen this has been done, the sliced fish are added, beginning with the thickest slices, down the smallest. The fish is covered with boiling water, and salt, pepper, fennel, the \"bouquet garni\" and the saffron. The dish is boiled at low heat, and stirred from time to time so that the fish does not stick to the casserole. The dish is cooked until the juice of the cooking is well blended with the oil and water, usually about twenty minutes.\n\nWhen the bouillabaisse is done, the rouille is prepared: the stem of the garlic is removed; the garlic cloves are crushed into a fine paste with a pestle in a mortar; the egg yolk and saffron are added and blended with olive oil little by little to make a mayonnaise.\n\nThe potatoes are peeled, cut into large slices and boiled in salted water for 15 to 20 minutes.\n\nThe last step is to open the sea urchins with a pair of scissors, and to remove the \"corail\" (gonads) with a small spoon. The pieces of fish are then arranged on a platter, and the \"corail\" of the sea urchins is added to the broth and stirred.\n\nIn this traditional version, the bouillon is served first, very hot, with the rouille spread on thick slices of bread rubbed with garlic. The fish and potatoes are served next on a separate platter.\n\nAnother version of the classic Marseille bouillabaisse, presented in the \"Petit LaRousse de la Cuisine\", uses congre, dorade, grondin, lotte, merlan, rascasse, saint-pierre, and velvet crabs (étrilles), and includes leeks. In this version, the heads and trimmings of the fish are put together with onions, celery and garlic browned in olive oil, and covered with boiling water for twenty minutes. Then the vegetables and bouquet garni are added, and then the pieces of fish in a specific order; first the rascasse, then the grondin, the lotte, congre, dorade, etrilles, and saffran. The dish is cooked for eight minutes over high heat. Then the most delicate fish, the saint pierre and merlan, are added, and the dish is cooked another 5–8 minutes. The broth is then served over bread with the rouille on top, and the fish and crabs are served on a large platter.\n\nOther variations add different seasonings, such as orange peel, and sometimes a cup of white wine or cognac is added.\n\nThese ingredients are often found in the traditional bouillabaisse of Provence.\nThe French screenwriter and playwright Marcel Pagnol, a member of the Académie française and a native of Marseille, showed his own idea of a proper bouillabaisse in two of his films. In \"\" (1935), the chef Cigalon serves a \"bouillabaisse provençale aux poissons de roche\", (Bouillabaisse of Provence with rockfish) made with a kilogram of local fish; \"Scorpaena scrofa\" (\"rascasse\"); capelin; angler fish (\"baudroie\"); john dory (\"Saint-Pierre\"); and slipper lobster (\"cigale de mer\"). \"When I put these fish into the pan,\" Cigalon says, \"they were still wiggling their tails.\" Cigalons specifies that the slices of bread served with the broth should be thick and not toasted, and that the rouille \"should not have too much pepper.\"\n\nIn the 1936 film \"César (film)\", Pagnol's hero Marius reveals the secret of the bouillabaisse of a small bistro near the port in Marseille. \"Everbody knows it,\" Marius says: \"they perfume the broth with a cream of sea urchins.\"\n\nThe dish originates in ancient Greece. The Phoceans, an Ancient Greek people who founded Marseille in 600 BC, ate a simple fish stew known in Greek as \"\"kakavia\"\". A dish similar to bouillabaisse also appears in Roman mythology: it is the soup that Venus fed to Vulcan.\n\nThe legend has it that bouillabaisse was created by Marseille fishermen who wanted to make a meal when they returned to port. Rather than using the more expensive fish, they cooked the common rockfish and shellfish that they pulled up with their nets and lines, usually fish that were too bony to serve in restaurants, cooking them in a cauldron of water on a wood fire and seasoning them with garlic and fennel. Tomatoes were added to the recipe in the 17th century, after their introduction from the Americas.\n\nIn the 19th century, as Marseille became more prosperous, restaurants and hotels began to serve bouillabaisse to upper class patrons. The recipe of bouillabaisse became more refined, with the substitution of fish stock for boiling water and the addition of saffron.\nBouillabaisse spread from Marseille to Paris, and then gradually around the world, adapted to local ingredients and tastes.\n\nThe name bouillabaisse comes from the method of the preparation—the ingredients are not added all at once. The broth is first boiled (\"bolh\") then the different kinds of fish are added one by one, and each time the broth comes to a boil, the heat is lowered (\"abaissa\").\n\nGenerally similar dishes are found in Greece, Italy (\"zuppa di pesce\"), Portugal (\"caldeirada\"), Spain (\"sopa de pescado y marisco\", ), and all the countries bordering the Mediterranean Sea. What makes a bouilabaisse different from these other dishes are the local Provençal herbs and spices, the particular selection of bony Mediterranean coastal fish, and the way the broth is served separately from the fish and vegetables.\n\n"}
{"id": "768630", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=768630", "title": "Sunwapta", "text": "Sunwapta\n\nSunwapta is a Stoney Indian word meaning \"turbulent river\" or \"radiating waves\" (as in ripples, small waves in a circular shape created after dropping an object in water).\n\nA number of geographic features in Jasper National Park of Canada have been named after this name:\n\n\nAdditionally, in 1934, Dr. George Richard Agar Rice included the word in his new Edmonton, Alberta based radio station company: Sunwapta Broadcasting.\n"}
{"id": "768680", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=768680", "title": "Virgin Cola", "text": "Virgin Cola\n\nVirgin Cola is a carbonated cola soft drink produced by Silver Spring and part of the Virgin Group. It was launched in 1994.\n\nVirgin Cola was set up during the early 1990s in conjunction with Cott, a Canadian company that specialises in bottling own-label drinks. Cott was looking for a major international brand that could have global appeal. Virgin founder, Richard Branson was looking to widen the Virgin name and to rival Coca-Cola and Pepsi brands.\n\nVirgin Cola began to hit international shores within its first year. The UK first served the drink on Virgin Atlantic flights, on-board shops on Virgin Trains and also at Virgin Cinemas. The Gulliver's Kingdom chain of theme parks in the UK also sold post mix Virgin cola. This led Virgin Cola to agree a distribution deal with British supermarket retailer Tesco in 1994.\nFrom 1996, the 500 ml bottles were marketed as \"The Pammy\", as their curves were designed to resemble Pamela Anderson who was at the height of her popularity in the UK at the time. It went on to be launched in France, Belgium and South Africa.\n\nIn 1998, Branson himself attended the USA launch of Virgin Cola, driving a tank into New York City's Times Square as part of the launch. It subsequently agreed distribution channels with US retailers such as Target. Virgin Drinks USA, the company dealing in Virgin Cola's US market, closed in April 2001, having managed to establish just a 0.5% share of the market by volume.\n\nIn 1999, a bottle of Virgin Cola can be seen on the coffee table in Monica and Rachel's apartment during the 4 February U.S. airing of the \"Friends\" episode entitled \"The One with Joey's Bag.\" Branson had previously appeared in an episode and was said to be a fan of the show. A can of Virgin Cola appeared in \"Ally McBeal\" in the title character's refrigerator in the episode \"Love Unlimited,\" first aired on 18 January 1999. \n\nIn 2002, a vanilla cola called Virgin Vanilla was launched in the UK, ahead of the launch of a similar product from rival Coca-Cola. In 2004, it was announced that Virgin Vanilla would be discontinued in order to focus on the teenage market.\n\nIn 2007, Silver Spring acquired the UK licence from Princes Group. However, in 2012 the company fell into administration and ceased production. No company acquired the UK Virgin Cola licence in its place.\n\nToday, despite the collapse of Virgin Cola in the United Kingdom, Virgin Cola is still sold in Afghanistan, Bangladesh, France, Italy, Japan, Kosovo, Malta, Nigeria, China, Switzerland, and Tunisia. Virgin Drinks has since fallen, but bottling companies in these countries have acquired the licence.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "771876", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=771876", "title": "Crumpet", "text": "Crumpet\n\nA crumpet is a small griddle cake made from an unsweetened batter of water or milk, flour and yeast, eaten in the United Kingdom, the Republic of Ireland, and some areas of the Commonwealth.\n\nCrumpets are regionally known as pikelets, a name also applied to a thinner, more pancake-like griddle cake: a type of the latter is referred to as a \"crumpet\" in Scotland.\n\nCrumpets have been variously described as originating in Wales or as part of the Anglo-Saxon diet, based on proposed etymologies of the word. In either case breads were, historically, commonly cooked on a griddle whererever bread ovens were not available. The \"bara-planc\", or griddle bread, baked on an iron plate over a fire, was part of the everyday diet in Wales until the 19th century.\n\nSmall, oval cakes baked in this manner were called \"picklets\", a name used for the first recognisable crumpet-type recipe, published in 1769 by Elizabeth Raffald in \"The Experienced English Housekeeper\". This name was derived from the Welsh \"bara pyglyd\" or \"pitchy [i.e. dark or sticky] bread\", later shortened simply to \"pyglyd\". The early 17th century lexicographer Randle Cotgrave referred to \"\"popelins\", soft cakes of fine flour, &c., fashioned like our Welsh \"barrapycleds\"\".\n\nThe word spread initially to the West Midlands of England, where it became anglicised as \"pikelet\", and subsequently to Cheshire, Lancashire, Yorkshire, and other areas of the north; crumpets are still referred to as \"pikelets\" in some areas. The word \"crumpet\" itself, of unclear origin, first appears in relatively modern times; it has been suggested as referring to a crumpled or curled-up cake, based on an isolated 14th century reference to a \"crompid cake\", and the Old English word \"crompeht\" (\"crumpled\") being used to gloss Latin \"folialis\", possibly a type of thin bread.\n\nAlternatively, \"crumpet\" may be related to the Welsh \"crempog\" or \"crempot\", a type of pancake. An etymology from the French language term \"crompâte\", meaning \"a paste of fine flour, slightly baked\" has also been suggested. However, a correspondent to Manchester \"Notes and Queries\", writing in 1883, claimed that the \"crampet\", as it was locally then known, simply took its name from the metal ring or \"cramp\" used to retain the batter during cooking.\n\nThe early crumpets were hard pancakes cooked on a griddle, rather than the soft and spongy crumpets of the Victorian era, which were made with yeast. From the 19th century a little bicarbonate of soda was also usually added to the batter. In modern times, the mass production of crumpets by large commercial bakeries has eroded some regional differences. As late as the 1950s Dorothy Hartley noted a wide degree of regional variation, identifying the small, thick, spongy type of crumpet specifically with the Midlands.\n\nCrumpets are distinguished from similar sized muffins by being made from a batter, rather than a dough. English crumpets are generally circular, roughly in diameter and thick. Their shape comes from being restrained in the pan/griddle by a shallow ring. They have a characteristic flat top with many small pores and a spongy texture which allows the butter or other spread to permeate it.\n\nCrumpets may be cooked until ready to eat warm from the pan, but are also left slightly undercooked and then toasted. While premade commercial versions are available in most supermarkets, freshly home-made crumpets are less heavy and doughy in texture. They are usually eaten with a spread of butter, or with other sweet or savoury toppings.\n\nWhile in some areas of the country the word \"pikelet\" is synonymous with the crumpet, in others (such as Staffordshire and Yorkshire) it refers to a slightly differing recipe. If differentiated from the crumpet, a pikelet is defined as containing no yeast as a raising agent and as being cooked without a ring, making it rather flatter or thinner than a crumpet, and a thinner batter was also used. In Stoke-on-Trent, pikelets were once sold in the town's many oatcake shops. A 1932 recipe for Staffordshire pikelets specifies that they were made with flour and buttermilk, with bicarbonate of soda as a raising agent, and suggests cooking them using bacon fat.\n\nThe term \"pikelet\" is used in Australian and New Zealand cuisine for a similarly flat cake, of the type that, in Scotland and North America, would be called a pancake and, in England, a Scotch pancake, girdle or griddle cake, or drop scone.\n\nA Scottish crumpet is broadly similar to the pikelet of parts of northern England. It is made from the same ingredients as a Scotch pancake, and is about diameter and thick. It is available plain, or as a fruit crumpet with raisins baked in, usually fried in a pan and served with a fried breakfast. It is also sometimes served with butter and jam. The ingredients include a leavening agent, usually baking powder, and different proportions of eggs, flour, and milk which create a thin batter. Unlike a pancake, it is cooked to brown on one side only, resulting in a smooth darker side where it has been heated by the griddle, then lightly cooked on the other side which has holes where bubbles have risen to the surface during cooking.\n\nThis is the normal kind of crumpet in Scottish bakers' shops, tea rooms, and cafés, though the English type of crumpet is always obtainable in supermarkets in addition to the Scottish kind.\n\nThe South African version of the crumpet, a popular dessert and breakfast treat, is almost identical to the Scottish recipe.\n"}
{"id": "775456", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=775456", "title": "Fascio", "text": "Fascio\n\nFascio (; plural \"fasci\") is an Italian word literally meaning \"a bundle\" or \"a sheaf\", and figuratively \"league\", and which was used in the late 19th century to refer to political groups of many different (and sometimes opposing) orientations. A number of nationalist \"fasci\" later evolved into the 20th century Fasci movement, which became known as \"fascism\".\n\nDuring the 19th century the bundle of rods, in Latin called \"fasces\" and in Italian \"fascio\", came to symbolise strength through unity, the point being that whilst each independent rod was fragile, as a bundle they were strong. By extension, the word \"fascio\" came in modern Italian political usage to mean group, union, band or league. It was first used in this sense in the 1870s by groups of revolutionary democrats in Sicily, to describe themselves. The most famous of these groups was the \"Fasci Siciliani\" during 1891–94. Thereafter, the word retained revolutionary connotations. It was these connotations which made it attractive, for example, to young nationalists who demanded Italian intervention in World War I. The \"fasci\" they formed were scattered over Italy, and it was to one of these spontaneously created groups, devoid of party affiliations, to which Benito Mussolini belonged.\n\nOn 18 August 1914 Italian syndicalist Alceste de Ambris, speaking from the rostrum of the Milanese Syndical Union (USM), began a ferocious attack against neutrality in World War I and urged intervention against German reaction and the necessity of aiding France and the United Kingdom. He equated the war with the French Revolution.\n\nThis caused a deep split within the Unione Sindacale Italiana (USI). The majority opted for neutrality. The Parma Labor Chamber, the USM, and other radical syndicalists left the USI and on 1 October 1914 founded the \"Fasci d'Azione rivoluzionaria internazionalista\". On October 5 Angelo Oliviero Olivetti published their manifesto in the first issue of a new series of \"Pagine libere\". Benito Mussolini shortly thereafter joined this group and took leadership.\n\nOn 11 December 1914 Mussolini started a political group, \"Fasci d'azione rivoluzionaria\", which was a fusion of two other movements: the above group, \"Fasci d'azione rivoluzionaria internazionalista\" and a previous group he started called the \"Fasci autonomi d'azione rivoluzionaria\".\n\nThis new group was also referred to as the Milan \"fascio\", of which Mussolini was the leader. 24 January 1915 was the turning point in the history of the \"fasci\" as their leaders met in Milan and formed a national organization.\n\nIn 1919, after the war had ended, Mussolini reconstituted the Milan \"fascio\", using the new name Fasci italiani di combattimento (\"Italian league of combatants\"). Other \"fasci\" of the same name were created, with the common goal of opposing all those– including the king and state– whose specific leanings were deemed to be depriving Italy of the fruits of victory in the war. According to H. W. Schneider, the new Milan \"fascio\" was formed of roughly the same people who had been members of the older \"fascio\" in 1915, but with a new name and a new objective.\n\nOn 7 November 1921 the Partito Nazionale Fascista (PNF), National Fascist Party, came into existence.\n\nIn Italy, after World War II, the term \"fascio\" is used as pejorative for \"neo-fascista\".\n\n"}
{"id": "776177", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=776177", "title": "Bakewell tart", "text": "Bakewell tart\n\nA Bakewell tart is an English confection consisting of a shortcrust pastry shell beneath layers of jam, frangipane, and a topping of flaked almonds. It is a variant of the Bakewell pudding, closely associated with the town of Bakewell in Derbyshire.\n\nThe Bakewell tart developed as a variant of the Bakewell pudding in the 20th century. Although the terms \"Bakewell tart\" and \"Bakewell pudding\" have been used interchangeably, each name refers to a specific dessert recipe. The tart is closely associated with the town of Bakewell in Derbyshire, but there is no evidence that it originated there.\n\nA Cherry Bakewell, also known as a Bakewell cake, is a version of the tart where the frangipane is covered with a top layer of almond-flavoured fondant and a single half glacé cherry.\n\nIn Gloucester, a similar tart was made using ground rice, raspberry jam and almond essence. In 2013, council leader Paul James discovered a recipe for \"Gloucester tart\" in a Gloucester history book. Subsequently, Gloucester museums revived the recipe, serving complimentary Gloucester tarts to museum patrons.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "777466", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=777466", "title": "Pepsi Twist", "text": "Pepsi Twist\n\nPepsi Twist is a lemon flavored cola, marketed by PepsiCo as an alternative to regular Pepsi.\n\nThe first incarnation of Pepsi Light was cola and lemon flavor with 50% fewer calories. It was soon replaced with lemon-flavored diet cola of the same name in the 1970s and 1980s in the United States called Pepsi Light, which was lemon-flavored by necessity to counteract the aftertaste of the artificial sweetener saccharin. When aspartame became more widely available, the lemon flavoring was removed from the newly rechristened Diet Pepsi.\n\nPepsi Twist was introduced in the United States on July 12, 2000 and again on June 12, 2001 until it was discontinued in the summer of 2006. \n\nPepsi launched Pepsi A-ha, with a lemon flavor in India, in 2002.\n\nPepsi Twist was marketed in Brazil (with lime instead of lemon), where a limited-edition version was also sold, the Pepsi Twistão, with an even stronger lime flavor. \n\nIt has also been released in Portugal as a limited edition during summer, and has remained popular.\n\nIn the Philippines, it was released in 2002 and was an instant hit among the teenagers but failed to capture the market.\n\nPepsi Twist was also marketed in Pakistan in 2006. The product failed to capture the market, but it is still available in some supermarkets.\n\nIt is marketed in Romania under the name Pepsi Twist Lemon. It was sold under the name of Pepsi Twist until recently, and its diet counterpart, Pepsi Twist Light Lemon.\n\nIt is available in Albania, Greece, Indonesia and China, and selected supermarkets in Germany. \n\nIt was introduced in Poland in the summer of 2002 and in Italy in late 2002. It is still a fairly popular drink in the former.\n\nIt was also released in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the late 2006. It is still marketing today, and it outsells the original Pepsi.\n\nIn the United Kingdom, Netherlands and Belgium, the original Pepsi Twist was sold for a while, and was replaced by Pepsi Max Twist, a \"lemon and lime\" version which has also been discontinued. It has since been returned under the \"Pepsi Max Cool Lemon\" brand.\n\nIn Ukraine, Pepsi Twist was marketed and sold during 2004. In 2012 reintroduced under \"Pepsi +1\" logo and \"Pepsi-Twist\" trade name.\n\nPepsi Twist made a brief return in the Summer of 2008 with the NFL Kickoff Limited Edition Flavor, which boasted that it was Pepsi \"with a kick of Lemon.\"\n\nIn Czech Republic and Slovakia, Pepsi Twist was introduced in 2002, its diet counterpart Pepsi Twist Light was introduced in January 2003. Both versions are still in sold.\n\nIn Latvia, Pepsi Twist was introduced in late 2011.\n\nIn Poland, 10 years after Pepsi Twist was introduced, PepsiCo decided to introduce Pepsi Light Lemon.\n\nIn Cyprus, Pepsi Twist is introduced in the start of 2014.\n\nIn Uruguay, Pepsi Twist was first launched in 2005. Now, 10 years after reintroduced in limited edition.\nSeptember 2015.\n\nIn July 2017, it was brought back as a limited time offer in Canada.\n\nThe product was advertised during Super Bowl 2003, with Ozzy, Jack, and Kelly Osbourne appearing in the commercial, along with Florence Henderson and Donny and Marie Osmond.\n\nIt was also endorsed by pop singer Britney Spears in 2002 and 2003 as part of her contract with the company; it also appeared in a promotion with \"Austin Powers in Goldmember\".\n\nThe product appears to be no longer actively marketed and does not appear on the list of brands on Pepsi's official website. Pepsi Twist production was ended in the U.S. during the summer of 2006, however the drink is still available in Malaysia, Japan, Poland, Germany, Italy, China and some other nations.\n\nIn 2005, Japanese toy company Takara released a special edition Transformers Optimus Prime (known as \"Convoy\" in Japan) figure in Pepsi colors with a bottle/can holding trailer. Known as \"Pepsi Convoy\", this figure comes pre-packaged with a cardboard Pepsi Twist bottle. This figure was later released two years later in America as \"Pepsi Optimus Prime\", with some slight modifications.\n\nIn 2008, the product was briefly re-introduced before the American football season but was in short supply.\n\nFormer professional wrestler CM Punk dubbed one of his signature moves the Pepsi Twist.\n\n"}
{"id": "777594", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=777594", "title": "Zamzam (soft drink)", "text": "Zamzam (soft drink)\n\nZamzam ( formerly Zamzam Cola) is a brand of soft drink produced in Iran by Zamzam Group. It is particularly popular in parts of the Muslim world, having gained a status there as an Iranian alternative to American products such as Coca-Cola and Pepsi.\nThe director of the Zamzam Group is Ahmad-Haddad Moghaddam. Zamzam Group is owned by the Mostazafan Foundation.\n\nOriginally a subsidiary of Pepsi created in Iran in 1954 as the first Iranian carbonated soft drink producer, Zamzam became its own corporation following the 1979 Islamic Revolution.\n\nFollowing the 2002 boycott of Coca-Cola by Saudi Arabia, Zamzam was unofficially dubbed the soft drink of the Hajj.\n\nThe product's name is a reference to the Well of Zamzam in Mecca, that is one of the stops on the Islamic pilgrimage of the Hajj.\n\nThe headquarters of Zamzam are in Tehran, Iran. The bottling facility in Tehran is a popular attraction where people can see the drink being bottled.\n\nThe production was at first a single production line, and now it owns seventeen beverage plants in Iran as well as several international companies, which produce and distribute Zamzam products under its licence. Zamzam Group has developed the most well equipped beverage concentrate plant in the Middle East. Zamzam Group had significant presence in domestic and international markets, and produces over one hundred diverse products including Cola, lemon, orange, lemonade, mango, mineral water and non-alcoholic malt beverage. Zamzam is also available in the United Arab Emirates and other surrounding nations.\n\n"}
{"id": "779006", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=779006", "title": "Haori", "text": "Haori\n\nThe is a traditional Japanese hip- or thigh-length kimono-style jacket, worn over a \"kosode\".\n\nThe \"haori\" does not close like the \"yukata\", but is worn open or kept closed by a string that connects the lapels. During the Sengoku period, sleeveless \"haori\" were worn over the armour, like the tabard was in Europe. During the Edo period, economic growth allowed the middle class to afford the \"haori\", yielding laws against ostentatious display of wealth by all but the warrior caste; this in turn gave birth to discreet \"haori\" designs with lavishly decorated lining.\n\n"}
{"id": "779829", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=779829", "title": "Kilburn White Horse", "text": "Kilburn White Horse\n\nThe Kilburn White Horse, , is a hill figure cut into the hillside in the North York Moors National Park near Kilburn in North Yorkshire, England. The figure is long by high and covers about and said to be the largest and most northerly hill figure in England.\n\nLocated on the southern flank of Sutton Bank, near Roulston Scar at the edge of the Hambleton table-land, it faces south-south-west and is visible from some distance, particularly from the East Coast Main Line railway south of Thirsk, and from the A19. On a clear day, the horse is visible from north Leeds, away on the higher ground to the west of the Vale of York.\n\nSutton Bank, geologically, is formed of sandstone and the horse was created by removing the topsoil and exposing the underlying rock and covering it with white limestone chips. It was created in November 1857, and some accounts state that it was done by school master John Hodgson and his pupils, together with local volunteers. A tablet erected at the car park below it reads, \"The Kilburn 'White Horse' -- This figure was cut in 1857 on the initiative of Thomas Taylor, a native of Kilburn. In 1925 a restoration fund was subscribed by the readers of the \"Yorkshire Evening Post\" and the residue of £100 was invested to provide for the triennial grooming of the figure.\"\n\nHowever, Morris Marples in his 1949 book gives Thomas Taylor the credit for being the prime mover: a native of Kilburn, he was a buyer for a London provision merchant, and he seems to have attended celebrations at Uffington White Horse in 1857, and he was inspired to give his home village a similar example. Thirty-three men were involved in cutting it, and 6 tons (6.1 metric tonnes) of lime were used to whiten the exposed rock.\nNowadays a car park is provided below the white horse and there is a footpath ascending past it and crossing immediately above it. The image itself is now formed of off-white limestone chips, but the steep gradient of the hillside, especially at the horse's breast and forelegs, have led to slumping and retention boards have been fixed to restrain this.\n\nThe footpath offers a scenic view. The car park is located on a steeply graded minor road between Kilburn village and the Sutton Bank National Park Centre on the A170 road, and the best view of the white horse itself is from the Bagby road; benches are provided at the best vantage point to allow leisurely observation.\n\nDuring World War II the horse was covered over to prevent it from becoming a conspicuous navigation landmark for enemy bombers.\nThis white horse can reputedly be seen from Julian's Bower, Alkborough in North Lincolnshire, over away.\n\nThe horse featured in the launch video for Channel 3 North East, the rebranded version of regional ITV station Tyne Tees Television, in September 1996.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "780166", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=780166", "title": "Sanitary napkin", "text": "Sanitary napkin\n\nA sanitary napkin, sanitary towel, sanitary pad, menstrual pad, or pad is an absorbent item worn in the underwear by women and girls who are menstruating, bleeding after giving birth, recovering from gynecologic surgery, experiencing a miscarriage or abortion, or in any other situation where it is necessary to absorb a flow of blood from the vagina.\n\nA menstrual pad is a type of feminine hygiene product that is worn externally, unlike tampons and menstrual cups which are worn inside the vagina. The frequency a woman will need to change her pad will vary depending on whether her menstrual flow is heavy or light. \n\nMenstrual pads are made from a range of materials, differing depending on style, country of origin, and brand. US brands include Kotex, Always, Equate, and Stayfree. Lil-lets are available in several other English-speaking countries. \n\nThese pads are not to be confused with generally higher absorbency incontinence pads, which are worn by people who have urinary incontinence problems or experience stress incontinence. Although menstrual pads are not made for this use, some people use them for this purpose.\n\nAlthough producers are generally reluctant to reveal the exact composition of their products, the main materials will usually be bleached rayon (cellulose made from wood pulp), cotton and plastics. In addition, fragrance and antibacterial agents can be included. The plastic parts are the backsheet and polymer powder as an additional powerful absorbent (superabsorbent polymers) that turns into a gel when moistened. Procter & Gamble are advertising a proprietary material called infinicel as the core of their napkins.\nIn general, the layering is as follows: \"an absorbent core material placed between a flexible liquid-pervious topsheet and a liquid-impervious plastic backsheet that has an adhesive on the outside for attaching the napkin to an undergarment\". As is the case with disposable tampons and diapers recycling is difficult and rarely done due to cost reasons although proof-of-principle solution appear to exist. When not dumped in a landfill where the non-biodegradable parts may persist for thousands of years, conventional hygiene products can at best be \"thermally recycled\" (incinerated). Environmentally more friendly solutions can be found in 100% cotton pads.\n\nThere are several different types of disposable menstrual pads:\n\n\nThe shape, absorbency and lengths may vary depending on manufacturer, but usually range from the short slender panty liner to the larger and longer overnight. Long pads are offered for extra protection or for larger people whose undergarments might not be completely protected by regular length pads, and also for overnight use.\n\nOther options are often offered in a manufacturer's line of pads, such as wings or tabs that wrap around the sides of underwear to add additional leak protection and help secure the pad in place. Deodorant is also added to some pads, which is designed to cover menstrual odor with a light fragrance. There are even panty liners specifically designed to be worn with a thong/G-string.\n\nAlternatively, some people use a washable or reusable cloth menstrual pad. These are made from a number of types of fabric—most often cotton flannel, or hemp (which is highly absorbent and not as bulky as cotton). Most styles have wings that secure around the underpants, but some are just held in place (without wings) between the body and the underpants. Some (particularly the older styles) are available in belted styles. Washable menstrual pads do not need to be disposed of after use and therefore offer a more economical alternative. Reusable menstrual pads can be found on a number of websites, or are made at home (instructions are available online). They have become a popular alternative because they are allergen- and perfume-free, and can be more comfortable for people who suffer from irritations from using disposable pads.\n\nCloth menstrual pads made a comeback around the 1970s, with their popularity increasing in the late 80s and early 90s. Reasons women choose to switch to cloth menstrual pads include comfort, savings over time, environmental impact and health reasons.\n\nThere are many styles of cloth menstrual pads available today, ranging from pantyliners to overnight pads. Popular styles of cloth menstrual pads include all-in-one, or AIO pads, in which the absorbent layer is sewn inside the pad, \"inserts on top\" style pads, which have absorbent layers that can be secured on top of the pad as needed, envelope or pocket style pads, which have absorbent layers that can be inserted inside the pad as needed, and a foldable style, in which the pad folds around the absorbent layers. Cloth menstrual pads can have waterproof lining, which provides more leak protection but may also be less breathable.\n\nMenstrual pads are worn to absorb menstrual discharge (and thereby protect clothing and furnishings). They are usually individually wrapped so they are easier and more discreet to carry in a purse or bag. This wrapper may be used to wrap the soiled pads before disposing of them in appropriate receptacles. Some people prefer to wrap the pads with toilet paper instead of (or as well as) using the wrapper, which, often being made of slick plastic with a small tape tab, may not adequately stick. Menstrual pads of any type should not be flushed down the toilet as they can cause blockages. In developed countries, public toilets almost always include a purpose-made receptacle in which to place soiled pads. In first aid, they make excellent dressings for heavy bleeding due to their high absorbency if gauze is unavailable or inadequate.\n\nMany people who experience urinary incontinence use menstrual pads to manage bladder leaks. However, since menstrual pads are designed to absorb menstrual flow, they are not as effective in absorbing urinary leaks; incontinence pads are designed for this purpose.\n\nIf a woman does not have sanitary napkins on hand, she might use toilet paper as a temporary substitution.\n\nThrough the ages women have used different forms of menstrual protection. Menstrual pads have been mentioned as early as the 10th century, in the Suda, where Hypatia, who lived in the 4th century AD, was said to have thrown one of her used menstrual rags at an admirer in an attempt to discourage him. Women often used strips of folded old cloth (rags) to absorb their menstrual flow, which is why the term \"on the rag\" is used to refer to menstruation.\n\nDisposable menstrual pads grew from a Benjamin Franklin invention created to help stop wounded soldiers from bleeding, but appear to have been first commercially available from around 1888 with the Southall's pad. The first commercially available American disposable napkins were Lister's Towels created by Johnson & Johnson in 1888. Disposable pads had their start with nurses using their wood pulp bandages to absorb their menstrual flow, creating a pad that was made from easily obtainable materials and inexpensive enough to throw away after use. Kotex's first advertisement for products made with this wood pulp (Cellucotton) appeared in January 1921. Several of the first disposable pad manufacturers were also manufacturers of bandages, which could give an indication of what these products were like.\n\nUntil disposable sanitary pads were created, cloth or reusable pads were widely used to collect menstrual blood. Women often used a variety of home-made menstrual pads which they crafted from various fabrics, or other absorbent materials, to collect menstrual blood. Even after disposable pads were commercially available, for several years they were too expensive for many women to afford. When they could be afforded, women were allowed to place money in a box so that they would not have to speak to the clerk and take a box of Kotex pads from the counter themselves. It took several years for disposable menstrual pads to become commonplace. However, they are now used nearly exclusively in most of the industrialized world.\n\nThe first of the disposable pads were generally in the form of a cotton wool or similar fibrous rectangle covered with an absorbent liner. The liner ends were extended front and back so as to fit through loops in a special girdle or belt worn beneath undergarments. This design was notorious for slipping either forward or back of the intended position.\n\nLater an adhesive strip was placed on the bottom of the pad for attachment to the crotch of the panties, and this became a favoured method with women. The belted sanitary napkin quickly disappeared during the early 1980s.\n\nThe ergonomic design and materials used to make pads also changed through the 1980s to today. With earlier materials not being as absorbent and effective, and early pads being up to two centimetres thick, leaks were a major problem. Some variations introduced were quilting of the lining, adding \"wings\" and reducing the thickness of the pad by utilising products such as sphagnum and polyacrylate superabsorbent gels derived from petroleum. The materials used to manufacture most pads are derived from the petroleum industry and forestry. The absorbent core, made from chlorine bleached wood pulp, could be reduced to make slimmer products with the addition of polyacrylate gels which sucks up the liquid quickly and holds it in a suspension under pressure. The remaining materials are mostly derived from the petroleum industry, the cover stock used is polypropylene non woven, with the leakproof barrier made from polyethylene film.\n\nIn developing countries, makeshift pads are still used to collect menstrual blood as they are cheaper. Rags, soil, and mud are also reportedly used for collecting menstrual flow by women who cannot afford the more expensive disposable pads or tampons.\n\nIn order to meet the need for achieving an inexpensive solution to reduce unsanitary and unhygienic practices in countries like India, Arunachalam Muruganantham from rural Coimbatore in the southern state of Tamil Nadu, India developed and patented a machine which could manufacture low-cost sanitary pads for less than a third of the former cost.\n\nNapkins, especially reusable ones, may be visible on full body scanners.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "782565", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=782565", "title": "Café de Paris sauce", "text": "Café de Paris sauce\n\nCafé de Paris sauce is a complex butter-based sauce served with grilled beef. When it is served with the sliced portion of an \"entrecôte\" (in American English: a rib eye steak) or a \"faux-filet\" (in English: a sirloin steak) the resulting dish is known as \"\"entrecôte\" Café de Paris\".\n\nThe sauce was first popularised in the 1940s by the Café de Paris restaurant in Geneva, then owned by Arthur-François (Freddy) Dumont, and \"entrecôte\" Café de Paris remains the restaurant's speciality. The Café de Paris attributes the origin of the sauce to Mr Dumont's father-in-law, one Mr Boubier. Today the restaurant also ships the sauce to several other restaurants which serve it under licence: the Café de Paris in Lausanne, the À l'Entrecôte in Sion (Switzerland), the Brasserie L'Entrecôte in Lisbon and Porto, and the Entrecôte Café de Paris restaurants in Dubai, Kuwait, Riyadh, Hong Kong and Stockholm.\n\nA closely similar sauce is also served by the Entrecôte groups of restaurants operated by the descendants of Paul Gineste de Saurs in Paris, Geneva, Toulouse, Lyon, London, New York, Beirut, Doha, Dubai, Riyadh, and other cities.\n\nBoth the Café de Paris and the Entrecôte groups of restaurants consider the sauce's ingredients and method of preparation to be a trade secret.\n\nThe Paris newspaper \"Le Monde\" reports that the sauce as served by Le Relais de Venise – L'Entrecôte is made from fresh thyme and thyme flowers, full cream (19 percent butterfat), white Dijon mustard, butter, water, salt, and pepper.\n\nThe Café de Paris serves its \"entrecôte\" on a bed of the sauce, on a platter kept hot atop a trivet with a warming candle in the base. Initially the sauce is a stiff whipped froth, tawny in colour, but as it melts down to a liquid it reverts to its natural creamy pea-soup-green colour. At the Entrecôte groups of restaurants, the sauce is served as a creamy pea-soup-green liquid from the outset rather than as a whipped froth, it is less prone to separate, and it is less salty.\n\nQuite distinct from the classic Café de Paris sauce are various compound butters commonly referred to as Café de Paris butter. These typically contain a mixture of herbs, spices, and other condiments such as mustard, marjoram, dill, rosemary, tarragon, paprika, capers, chives, curry powder, parsley, shallot, garlic, Worcestershire sauce, and anchovies, all whipped into the butter. The resulting compound butter is shaped into a roll using aluminium foil and chilled. When the dish is served, a piece of the butter is sliced off and allowed to melt on the hot meat.\n\n"}
{"id": "782937", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=782937", "title": "Coors Light", "text": "Coors Light\n\nCoors Light is a 4.2% ABV light beer brewed in Golden, Colorado; Albany, Georgia; Elkton, Virginia; Fort Worth, Texas; Irwindale, California; Moncton, New Brunswick; and Milwaukee, Wisconsin. It was first produced in 1978 by the Coors Brewing Company.\n\nThe beer has a \"Cold Certified\" label which turns the mountains on the label from white to blue when the beer's temperature is lowered to . Coors Light has a \"mountain icon\" to represent the beer in place of the logo. The icon is a stylized drawing of a \nmountain with two peaks. In Australia Coors Light is labelled as Coors.\n\nAdolph Coors was born in 1847 in a German town known today as Wuppertal-Oberbarmen. At the age of 14 he began working at the Henry Wenker Brewery in Dortmund. Adolph Coors considered water to be the key ingredient for a perfect beer. Therefore, he decided to locate Adolph Coors Company in Golden, Colorado in 1873. The Rocky Mountains are the primary source of the water used in its beer.\n\nThere were a number of trends occurring in the mid-1970s. Health was one of the most discussed topics in the American population. The baby-boomer generation was reaching their drinking age, and therefore they gave the beer drinking demographic a shift. They were concerned about their health, but they also wanted to drink beer. There was a growing interest in low-calorie beverages. In 1975, light beers made up only 1% of beer consumption in the United States, and by 1994, they accounted for 35% of all domestic beer sold in the United States. In 1978, Coors introduced the popular Coors Light brand.\n\nCoors Light advertisings highlight the quality of the beer as \"the most refreshing place on earth\". Additionally, Coors Light ads are designed to target young demographics. The stories behind the ads seek to capture the attention of young people, situating them in cool places they would like to be. Cavalry Agency out of Chicago, IL, is no longer the current Advertising Agency for Coors Light. Cavalry was responsible for the 'Reach For The Cold' Campaign featuring the Coors Light Explorers. Additionally, on April 2013, the agency produced a Digital Video for Coors Light ad known as \"Coors Light the brewer ambushes a summer pool party with the frosty taste of winter\". The T.V. ad was considered the ad of the week in the Adweek publication.\n\nThe brewery introduced the “perfect shot of refreshment” under the slogan of a “Silver Bullet”; a symbol of the silver can where the beer was packaged.\n\nIn May 2013, the Coors Light aluminum pint, featuring Ball Corporation Alumi-Tek® bottle, has been awarded a Gold Award from The Packaging Association (PAC) and was chosen as the Canadian Packaging Consumers Voice Award winner at the recent PAC Leadership Awards. The Coors Light aluminum pint was selected for its eye-catching graphics, recyclability and the convenience of the bottle's wide mouth and resealable closure.\n\nOn August, 2013, the advertising industry’s self-regulatory unit referred Miller Coors’ ad claims to the Federal Trade Commission (FTC). The claims that the FTC considered ad challenging included, “the world's most refreshing can,\" \"beer on the inside, science on the outside\" and \"smoother, more refreshing pour,\" implying that the can was somehow technologically superior to other beer cans and provides a more refreshing beverage experience.\n\nAccording to the National Advertising Division (NAD), Miller Coors declined to provide a substantive response to the challenge. Miller Coors defended the claims as either puffery or truthful. The company also told NAD that the TV, radio and digital campaigns would be permanently discontinued by the end of September 2013.\n\nIn order to expand Molson Coors brand portfolio outside of its major markets (US, UK, Canada), Molson Coors established Molson Coors International in 2008. MCI operates in three primary regions; Asia, Europe, Latin America and the Caribbean. Coors Light, as a signature brand of Molson Coors, was introduced in the new markets. The world's sixth-largest brewer, which also makes Molson Canadian, Carling and Blue Moon, was trying to diversify beyond its core markets.\n\nIn 2005, Coors light was awarded with a silver medal in the Great American Beer Festival in the American-Style Light Lager category.\n\nMillerCoors' title sponsorship of the newly created Coors Light National Hockey League Stadium Series. MillerCoors' sponsorship of the stadium series is part of the beer company’s seven-year, $375M deal signed with the NHL in February 2011, the league’s most financially lucrative sponsorship ever.\n\nIn 2013, MillerCoors owned Coors Light inked a year-long deal with Turner Broadcasting, which includes a sponsorship of the NASCAR Mobile applications. Coors Light uses the sponsorship with in-application banners and content to connect with NASCAR’s core demographic of sports fans. The initiative builds on Coors Light’s previous mobile initiatives to target consumers by demographic.\n\n\nIn the 1990s, Coors Light sponsored what was then America's most dominant domestic professional cycling team, which included Olympians Alexi Grewal, Roy Knickman, and Davis Phinney.\n\nIn 2008, Coors Light became known as the \"Official Beer of NASCAR\", succeeding Budweiser.\n\nIn 2009, a Coors Light koozie depicting scenes from the 2010 Winter Olympics was offered in a limited number of cases that contained 28 bottles instead of 24. That same year, the Hillside Chalet Contest was created. The winner was given a 6-night stay in Whistler, British Columbia, during the 2010 Winter Olympics.\n\nDuring 2012 and 2013, Coors Light partnered with Ice Cube for the Coors Light Search for the Coldest National Tour and Talent Search.\n\n"}
{"id": "789633", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=789633", "title": "Gooey butter cake", "text": "Gooey butter cake\n\nGooey butter cake (also \"Ooey Gooey butter cake\", occasionally \"chess cake\") is a type of cake traditionally made in St. Louis. Gooey butter cake is a flat and dense cake made with wheat cake flour, butter, sugar, and eggs, typically near an inch tall, and dusted with powdered sugar. While sweet and rich, it is somewhat firm, and is able to be cut into pieces similarly to a brownie. Gooey butter cake is generally served as a type of coffee cake and not as a formal dessert cake. There are two distinct variants of the gooey butter: a bakers' gooey butter and a cream cheese and commercial yellow cake mix variant. It is believed to have originated in the 1930s.\n\nThe St. Louis Convention & Visitors Commission includes a recipe for the cake on its website, calling it \"one of St. Louis' popular, quirky foods\". The recipe calls for a bottom layer of butter and yellow cake batter, and a top layer made from eggs, cream cheese, and, in one case, almond extract. The cake is dusted with confectioner's sugar before being served. The cake is best eaten soon after baking it. It should be served at room temperature or warm.\n\nThe cream cheese variant of the gooey butter cake recipe, while close enough to the original, is an approximation designed for easier preparation at home. Almost all bakeries in the greater St. Louis area, including those at local grocery chains Schnucks and Dierbergs, use a slightly different recipe based on corn syrup, sugar and powdered eggs; however, no cake mix or cream cheese is involved.\n\nThe cake was supposedly first made by accident in the 1930s by a St. Louis-area German American baker who was trying to make regular cake batter but reversed the proportions of butter and flour.\n\nJohn Hoffman was the owner of the bakery where the mistake was made. The real story is there were two types of butter \"smears\" used in his bakery: a gooey butter and a deep butter. The deep butter was used for deep butter coffee cakes. The gooey butter was used as an adhesive for things like Danish rolls and stollens. The gooey butter was smeared across the surface, then the item was placed in coconut, hazelnuts, peanuts, crumbs or whatever was desired so they would stick to the product.\n\nHoffman hired a new baker who was supposed to make deep butter cakes, but got the two butter smears mixed up. The mistake wasn't caught until after the cakes came out of the proof box. Rather than throw them away, Hoffman went ahead and baked them. This baking mistake was made during the Great Depression, which meant supplies for baking ingredients were low. The new cake sold so well that Hoffman kept baking and selling them and soon, so did the other bakers around St. Louis.\n\nAnother St. Louis baker, Fred Heimburger, also remembers the cake coming on the scene in the 1930s, as a slip up that became a popular hit and local acquired taste. He liked it well enough that Mr. Heimburger tried to promote gooey butter cake by taking samples of it with him when he traveled out of St. Louis to visit other bakers in their shops. They liked it, but they couldn't get their customers to buy it. Their reactions tending to regard it as looking too much like a mistake, and \"a flat gooey mess\". And so it remained as a regional favorite for many decades.\n\nGooey butter cake is also commonly known outside of the St. Louis area as \"ooey gooey butter cake,\" due to its popularization by celebrity chef Paula Deen.\n\nThere has been some controversy from the Loyet family in St. Louis, Missouri, that gooey butter cake originally was created in the popular Loyet Bakery. Despite these viral claims on social media, some family members believe that the Loyet Bakery never even existed.\n\nMany St. Louis area grocery stores sell fresh or boxed gooey butter cakes. Haas Baking sold a widely distributed, square and packaged version in a box that depicts a colorful, if anachronistic scene of aviator Charles Lindbergh's plane the Spirit of St. Louis flying past downtown St. Louis, the Gateway Arch and the modern cityscape in clouds. Independent or family bakeries make gooey butter cakes, from a time when there were still many neighborhood corner German and Austrian American bakeries in St. Louis, in neighborhoods like Dutchtown, Bevo Mill, and the Tower Grove area, and others. There are now several businesses that specialize in different flavors of gooey butter cake and sell them in coffee shops, or to walk in customers, or by order or shipment.\n\nPanera Bread Company (original name: St. Louis Bread Company) makes a Danish with a gooey butter filling for the St. Louis market. More recently, Walgreens sells wrapped, individual slices of a version of St. Louis gooey butter cake as a snack alongside muffins, brownies, and cookies.\n\nGooey butter cake is now widely available outside of the St. Louis area, as Walmart has been marketing a version called Paula Deen Baked Goods Original Gooey Butter Cake. While Walmart still sells a gooey butter cake, they dropped the Paula Deen version. \n\nModern versions of this confection, originally sold as a breakfast pastry or \"coffee cake\", have shown up on upscale restaurant menus across the Midwest and even the West coast.\n\nOn the SyFy television series \"Defiance\", Nolan and Quentin discuss gooey butter cake while in \"Old St. Louis\" in the episode \"Down In the Ground Where the Dead Men Go\". It was featured on an episode of \"Pizza Masters\" titled \"Leave Me in St. Louis.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "790752", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=790752", "title": "Sauce Robert", "text": "Sauce Robert\n\nSauce Robert is a brown mustard sauce and one of the \"small sauces\", or compound sauces, derived from the Classic French demi-glace, which in turn is derived from Espagnole sauce, one of the five mother sauces in French cuisine (Bechamel, Veloute, Espagnole, Sauce Tomate and Hollandaise) .\n\nSauce Robert is made from chopped onions cooked in butter without color, a reduction of white wine, pepper, an addition of demi-glace and is finished with mustard.\n\nIt is best suited to pork, especially grilled pork, and meats.\n\nSauce Robert is one of the earliest compound sauces on record. Of the 78 compound sauces systematized by Marie-Antoine Carême in the early 19th century, only two—Sauce Robert and Remoulade—were present in much older cookbooks, such as Massaliot's \"Le Cuisinier Roial et Bourgeois\" in 1691. In Charles Perrault's canonical telling of Sleeping Beauty (1696), the ogress Queen Mother insists that Sleeping Beauty and her children be served to her à la Sauce Robert.\n\nA version of Sauce Robert also appears in Francois-Pierre de la Varenne (cook to Henry IV)'s \"Le Cuisinier François\" (1651), the founding text of modern French cuisine.\n\n"}
{"id": "791882", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=791882", "title": "Calzone", "text": "Calzone\n\nA calzone (, ; , \"stocking\" or \"trouser\") is an Italian oven-baked folded pizza that originated in Naples in the 18th century. A typical calzone is made from salted bread dough, baked in an oven and is stuffed with salami, ham or vegetables, mozzarella, ricotta and Parmesan or pecorino cheese, as well as an egg. Different regional variations on a calzone can often include other ingredients that are normally associated with pizza toppings.\n\nSandwich-sized calzones are often sold at Italian lunch counters or by street vendors, because they are easy to eat while standing up or walking. Fried versions of the calzone are typically filled with tomato and mozzarella: these are made in Apulia and are called \"panzerotti\".\n\nThe Sicilian \"cuddiruni\" or \"cudduruni\" pizza is distantly related to the calzone. This is a dish stuffed with onions (or sometimes other vegetables, such as potatoes or broccoli), anchovies, olives, cheese and mortadella; the rolled pizza dough is folded in two over the stuffing and the edges are sealed before the dish is fried.\n\nIn the United States, calzones are typically made from pizza dough and stuffed with meats, cheeses and vegetables. \n\nTraditional calzone dough, consisting of flour, yeast, olive oil, water and salt, is kneaded and rolled into medium-sized disks.\nEach is then filled with cheeses such as ricotta, mozzarella, Parmesan, provolone, and other traditional vegetables or meats. The dough is then folded in half over the filling and sealed with an egg mixture in a half-moon shape, or is sometimes shaped into a ball by pinching and sealing all the edges at the top. It is then either baked or fried. \n\nIn some areas, just before serving, they are topped with marinara or other traditional sauce, or with a mixture of garlic, olive oil and parsley. \n\nSimilar dishes are scacciata and stromboli.\n\nIn Italy, as of the 1960s, calzones were popularly believed to be the most efficient type of pizza for home delivery. This popular credence had some scientific ground as the folded nature of the calzone results in a lower surface-to-volume ratio than a traditional pizza resulting in better heat retention during the journey from the pizzeria to the buyer's home. This results in a calzone being delivered warmer than pizza, all other things being equal.\n\n"}
{"id": "793839", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=793839", "title": "Zwiebelkuchen", "text": "Zwiebelkuchen\n\nZwiebelkuchen (German for \"onion cake\") is a savory German one-crust onion cake made of steamed onions, diced bacon, cream, and caraway seeds on either a yeast dough or a leavened dough.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "794868", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=794868", "title": "Mushy peas", "text": "Mushy peas\n\nMushy peas are dried marrowfat peas which are first soaked overnight in water with sodium bicarbonate (baking soda), then rinsed in fresh water and simmered with a little sugar and salt until they form a thick green lumpy mash. Sometimes mint is used as a flavouring. Throughout the British Isles (in particular Northern England and the Midlands) they are a traditional accompaniment to fish and chips. In Northern England they are commonly served as part of the popular snack of pie and peas (akin to the South Australian pie floater, but with mushy peas instead of a thick pea soup) and are considered to be a part of traditional British cuisine. Mushy peas can also be bought ready prepared in tin cans. They are sometimes also packed into a ball, deep-fried in batter, and served as a pea fritter.\n\nIn Yorkshire, Nottinghamshire, Derbyshire and parts of Lincolnshire, mushy peas are often served as a snack on their own. In Nottinghamshire they are traditionally accompanied by mint sauce, and sold at open-air events such as fairs or fêtes. In Nottinghamshire, mushy peas served with chips is called a 'pea mix'. Mushy peas are also popular in Scotland served with fish and chips or as a wetter version with vinegar in a bowl.\nA variant (particularly popular around Bolton, Bury, and Preston, Lancashire) is \"parched peas\" – carlin peas (also known as maple peas, or black peas) soaked and then boiled slowly for a long time; these peas are traditionally served with vinegar.\n\nMushy peas have occasionally been referred to as \"Yorkshire caviar\".\n\nGreen colouring is often used to colour mushy peas. It is typically achieved by adding the yellow and blue additives, Tartrazine (E102) and Brilliant Blue FCF (E133), which together produce the green effect. The use of artificial colours results in bright green mushy peas. Pure mushy peas, with no colouring, tend to form a more grey-green end product. Sodium bicarbonate (E500) is often added to soften the peas to enhance the colour and to inhibit fermentation during soaking, which reduces later flatulence in consuming said foods. The British Food Standards Agency, on 28 April 2008, asked for a voluntary ban on artificial food colourings and suggested that the ban would be practical by the end of 2009. This would mean that certain foods, including mushy peas, would need to be free of the additive, otherwise the item might be removed from sale. Ministers have stated that they will pursue a ban through law if food manufacturers do not phase out the food colourings. As of 2018, the ban is yet to come into effect.\n\nMushy peas present a particular problem since replacing tartrazine proved challenging. While natural alternatives do exist - most notably beta-carotene, which is the natural orange pigment found in carrots and curcumin, which is extracted from turmeric - they do not result in colours as strong nor as vibrant, which is why manufacturers prefer to use tartrazine if possible. Without the colourant the dish would be murky grey. In July 2010 an EU directive required the warning label \"May have effects on activity and attention in children\" to be applied to foods containing tartrazine.\n\n"}
{"id": "795199", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=795199", "title": "Breast milk", "text": "Breast milk\n\nBreast milk is the milk produced by the breasts (or mammary glands) of a human female to feed a child. Milk is the primary source of nutrition for newborns before they are able to eat and digest other foods; older infants and toddlers may continue to be breastfed, in combination with other foods from six months of age when solid foods should be introduced.\n\nThe baby nursing from its own mother is the most common way of obtaining breast milk, but the milk can be pumped and then fed by baby bottle, cup and/or spoon, supplementation drip system, or nasogastric tube. In preterm children who do not have the ability to suck during their early days of life, avoiding bottles and tubes, and use of cups to feed expressed milk and other supplements is reported to result in better breastfeeding extent and duration subsequently. Breast milk can be supplied by a woman other than the baby's mother, either via donated pumped milk (generally from a milk bank or via informal milk donation), or when a woman nurses a child other than her own at her breast, a practice known as wetnursing.\n\nThe World Health Organization recommends exclusive breastfeeding for the first six months of life, with solids gradually being introduced around this age when signs of readiness are shown. Supplemented breastfeeding is recommended until at least age two and then for as long as the mother and child wish.\n\nBreastfeeding offers health benefits to mother and child even after infancy. These benefits include a 73% decreased risk of sudden infant death syndrome, increased intelligence, decreased likelihood of contracting middle ear infections, cold and flu resistance, a tiny decrease in the risk of childhood leukemia, lower risk of childhood onset diabetes, decreased risk of asthma and eczema, decreased dental problems, decreased risk of obesity later in life, and a decreased risk of developing psychological disorders, including in adopted children. In addition, feeding an infant breast milk is associated with lower insulin levels and higher leptin levels compared feeding an infant via powdered-formula.\n\nBreastfeeding also provides health benefits for the mother. It assists the uterus in returning to its pre-pregnancy size and reduces post-partum bleeding, as well as assisting the mother in returning to her pre-pregnancy weight. Breastfeeding also reduces the risk of breast cancer later in life. Lactation protects both mother and infant from both types of diabetes. Lactation may protect the infant from specifically developing Type 2 diabetes because studies have shown that bioactive ingredients in human breast milk could prevent excess weight gain during childhood via contributing to a feeling of energy and satiety. A lower risk of child-onset diabetes may more applicable to infants who were born from diabetic mothers. The reason is because while breastfeeding for at least the first 6 months of life minimizes the risk of Type 1 diabetes from occurring in the infant, inadequate breastfeeding in an infant prenatally exposed to diabetes was associated with a higher risk of the child developing diabetes later on. However, it can be argued that human breastfeeding may contribute to protective effects against the development of Type 1 diabetes due to the fact that the alternative of bottle-feeding may expose infants to unhygienic feeding conditions.\n\nThough it now is almost universally prescribed, in some countries in the 1950s the practice of breastfeeding went through a period where it was out of vogue and the use of infant formula was considered superior to breast milk. However, it is now universally recognized that there is no commercial formula that can equal breast milk. In addition to the appropriate amounts of carbohydrate, protein, and fat, breast milk provides vitamins, minerals, digestive enzymes, and hormones. Breast milk also contains antibodies and lymphocytes from the mother that help the baby resist infections. The immune function of breast milk is individualized, as the mother, through her touching and taking care of the baby, comes into contact with pathogens that colonize the baby, and, as a consequence, her body makes the appropriate antibodies and immune cells.\n\nAt around four months of age, the internal iron supplies of the infant, held in the hepatic cells of the liver, are exhausted. The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends that at this time that an iron supplement should be introduced, however, other health organisations such as the NHS in the UK have no such recommendation. Breast milk contains less iron than formula, because it is more bioavailable as lactoferrin, which carries more safety for mothers and children than ferrous sulphate.\n\nBoth the AAP and the NHS recommend vitamin D supplementation for breastfed infants. Vitamin D can be synthesised by the infant via exposure to sunlight, however, many infants are deficient due being kept indoors or living in areas with insufficient sunlight. Formula is supplemented with vitamin D for this reason.\n\nUnder the influence of the hormones prolactin and oxytocin, women produce milk after childbirth to feed the baby. The initial milk produced is referred to as colostrum, which is high in the immunoglobulin IgA, which coats the gastrointestinal tract. This helps to protect the newborn until its own immune system is functioning properly. It also creates a mild laxative effect, expelling meconium and helping to prevent the build-up of bilirubin (a contributory factor in jaundice).\n\nActual inability to produce enough milk is rare, with studies showing that mothers from developing countries experiencing nutritional hardship still produce amounts of milk of similar quality to that of mothers in developed countries. There are many reasons a mother may not produce enough breast milk. Some of the most common reasons are an improper latch (i.e., the baby does not connect efficiently with the nipple), not nursing or pumping enough to meet supply, certain medications (including estrogen-containing hormonal contraceptives), illness, and dehydration. A rarer reason is Sheehan's syndrome, also known as postpartum hypopituitarism, which is associated with prolactin deficiency and may require hormone replacement.\n\nThe amount of milk produced depends on how often the mother is nursing and/or pumping: the more the mother nurses her baby or pumps, the more milk is produced. It is beneficial to nurse when the baby wants to nurse rather than on a schedule. A Cochrane review came to the conclusion that a greater volume of milk is expressed whilst listening to relaxing audio during breastfeeding, along with warming and massaging of the breast prior to and during feeding. A greater volume of milk expressed can also be attributed to instances where the mother starts pumping milk sooner, even if the infant is unable to breastfeed.\n\nSodium concentration is higher in hand-expressed milk, when compared with the use of manual and electric pumps, and fat content is higher when the breast has been massaged, in conjunction with listening to relaxing audio. This may be important for low birthweight infants. If pumping, it is helpful to have an electric, high-grade pump so that all of the milk ducts are stimulated. Galactagogues increase milk supply, although even herbal variants carry risks; therefore non-pharmaceutical methods should be tried first.\n\nBreast milk contains complex proteins, lipids, carbohydrates and other biologically active components. The composition changes over a single feed as well as over the period of lactation.\n\nDuring the first few days after delivery, the mother produces colostrum. This is a thin yellowish fluid that is the same fluid that sometimes leaks from the breasts during pregnancy. It is rich in protein and antibodies that provide passive immunity to the baby (the baby's immune system is not fully developed at birth). Colostrum also helps the newborn's digestive system to grow and function properly.\n\nColostrum will gradually change to become mature milk. In the first 3–4 days it will appear thin and watery and will taste very sweet; later, the milk will be thicker and creamier. Human milk quenches the baby's thirst and hunger and provides the proteins, sugar, minerals, and antibodies that the baby needs.\n\nIn the 1980s and 1990s, lactation professionals (De Cleats) used to make a differentiation between foremilk and hindmilk. But this differentiation causes confusion as there are not two types of milk. Instead, as a baby breastfeeds, the fat content very gradually increases, with the milk becoming fattier and fattier over time.\n\nThe level of Immunoglobulin A (IgA) in breast milk remains high from day 10 until at least 7.5 months post-partum.\n\nHuman milk contains 0.8% to 0.9% protein, 4.5% fat, 7.1% carbohydrates, and 0.2% ash (minerals). Carbohydrates are mainly lactose; several lactose-based oligosaccharides have been identified as minor components. The fat fraction contains specific triglycerides of palmitic and oleic acid (O-P-O triglycerides), and also lipids with trans bonds (see: trans fat). The lipids are vaccenic acid, and Conjugated linoleic acid (CLA) accounting for up to 6% of the human milk fat.\n\nThe principal proteins are alpha-lactalbumin, lactoferrin (apo-lactoferrin), IgA, lysozyme, and serum albumin. In an acidic environment such as the stomach, alpha-lactalbumin unfolds into a different form and binds oleic acid to form a complex called HAMLET that kills tumor cells. This is thought to contribute to the protection of breastfed babies against cancer.\n\nNon-protein nitrogen-containing compounds, making up 25% of the milk's nitrogen, include urea, uric acid, creatine, creatinine, amino acids, and nucleotides. Breast milk has circadian variations; some of the nucleotides are more commonly produced during the night, others during the day.\n\nMother's milk has been shown to supply endocannabinoids (the natural neurotransmitters that cannabis simulates) 2-Arachidonoyl glycerol, anandamide, oleoylethanolamide, palmitoylethanolamide, N-arachidonoyl glycine, eicosapentaenoyl ethanolamide, docosahexaenoyl ethanolamide, N-palmitoleoyl-ethanolamine, dihomo-γ-linolenoylethanolamine, N-stearoylethanolamine, prostaglandin F2alpha ethanolamides and prostaglandin F2 ethanolamides, Palmitic acid esters of hydroxy-stearic acids (PAHSAs). They may act as an appetite stimulant, but they also regulate appetite so infants don't eat too much. That may be why formula-fed babies have a higher caloric intake than breastfed babies.\n\nBreast milk isn't sterile, but contains as many as 600 different species of various bacteria, including beneficial Bifidobacterium breve, B. adolescentis, B. longum, B. bifidum, and B. dentium.\n\nBreast milk contains a unique type of sugars, human milk oligosaccharides (HMOs), which are not present in infant formula. HMOs are not digested by the infant but help to make up the intestinal flora. They act as decoy receptors that block the attachment of disease causing pathogens, which may help to prevent infectious diseases. They also alter immune cell responses, which may benefit the infant. To date (2015) more than a hundred different HMOs have been identified; both the number and composition vary between women and each HMO may have a distinct functionality.\n\nThe breast milk of diabetic mothers has been shown to have a different composition from that of non-diabetic mothers. It may contain elevated levels of glucose and insulin and decreased polyunsaturated fatty acids. A dose-dependent effect of diabetic breast milk on increasing language delays in infants has also been noted, although doctors recommend that diabetic mothers breastfeed despite this potential risk.\n\nWomen breastfeeding should consult with their physician regarding substances that can be unwittingly passed to the infant via breast milk, such as alcohol, viruses (HIV or HTLV-1) or medications. Even though most infants infected with HIV contract the disease from breastfeeding, most infants that are breastfed by their HIV positive mothers never contract the disease. While this paradoxical phenomenon suggests that the risk of HIV transmission between an HIV positive mother and her child via breastfeeding is small, studies have also shown that feeding infants with breast milk of HIV-positive mothers can actually have a preventative effect against HIV transmission between the mother and child. This inhibitory effect against the infant contracting HIV is likely due to unspecified factors exclusively present in breast milk of HIV-positive mothers.\n\nMost women that do not breastfeed use infant formula, but breast milk donated by volunteers to human milk banks can be obtained by prescription in some countries. In addition, research has shown that women who rely on infant formula could minimize the gap between the level of immunity protection and cognitive abilities a breastfed child benefits from versus the degree to which a bottle-fed child benefits from them. This can be done by supplementing formula-fed infants with bovine milk fat globule membranes (MFGM) meant to mimic the positive effects of the MFGMs which are present in human breast milk.\n\nExpressed breast milk can be stored. Lipase may cause thawed milk to taste soapy or rancid due to milk fat breakdown. It is still safe to use, and most babies will drink it. Scalding it will prevent rancid taste at the expense of antibodies. It should be stored with airtight seals. Some plastic bags are designed for storage periods of less than 72 hours. Others can be used for up to 12 months if frozen. This table describes safe storage time limits.\n\nAll mammalian species produce milk, but the composition of milk for each species varies widely and other kinds of milk are often very different from human breast milk. As a rule, the milk of mammals that nurse frequently (including human babies) is less rich, or more watery, than the milk of mammals whose young nurse less often. Human milk is noticeably thinner and sweeter than cow's milk.\n\nWhole cow's milk contains too little iron, retinol, vitamin E, vitamin C, vitamin D, unsaturated fats or essential fatty acids for human babies. Whole cow's milk also contains too much protein, sodium, potassium, phosphorus and chloride which may put a strain on an infant's immature kidneys. In addition, the proteins, fats and calcium in whole cow's milk are more difficult for an infant to digest and absorb than the ones in breast milk. Evaporated milk may be easier to digest due to the processing of the protein but is still nutritionally inadequate. Some infants are allergic to cow's milk protein, this problem may be associated with infant formulas derived from cow's milk.\n\nAlmost all medicines pass into breastmilk in small amounts. Some have no effect on the baby and can be used while breastfeeding. Women with hypothyroidism may be unable to produce milk. Alcohol use during pregnancy carries a significant risk of serious birth defects, but consuming alcohol after the birth of the infant is considered safe.\n\nPesticides and other toxic substances bioaccumulate; i.e., creatures higher up the food chain will store more of them in their body fat. This is an issue in particular for the Inuit, whose traditional diet is predominantly meat. Studies are looking at the effects of polychlorinated biphenyls and persistent organic pollutants in the body; the breast milk of Inuit mothers is extraordinarily high in toxic compounds.\n\nThere is a market for human breast milk, both in the form of wet nurse service and milk product. As a product, breast milk is exchanged by human milk banks as well as directly between milk donors and customers mediated by websites on the Internet. Human milk banks generally have standardized measures for screening donors and storing the milk, while donors on websites vary in regard to these measures. A study in 2013 came to the conclusion that 74% of breast milk samples from providers found from websites were colonized with Gram-negative bacteria or had more than 10,000 colony-forming units/mL of aerobic bacteria. Growth happens during transit. According to the FDA, the bacteria in fresh milk doubles every 20 minutes. Breast milk is considered to be healthier than cow's milk and infant formula when it comes to feeding an infant in the first 6 months of life, but only under extreme situations do international health organizations support feeding an infant breast milk from a healthy wet nurse rather than that of its biological mother. One reason is because the unregulated breast milk market is fraught with risks such as drugs of abuse and prescription medications being present in donated breast milk. The transmission of these substances through breast milk can do more harm than good when it comes to the health outcomes of the infant recipient.\n\nA minority of people, including restaurateurs Hans Lochen of Switzerland and Daniel Angerer of Austria, who operates a restaurant in New York City, have used human breast milk, or at least advocated its use, as a substitute for cow's milk in dairy products and food recipes. An Icecreamist in London's Covent Garden started selling an ice cream named Baby Gaga in February 2011. Each serving cost £14. All the milk was donated by a Mrs Hiley who earned £15 for every 10 ounces and called it a \"great recession beater\". The ice cream sold out on its first day. Despite the success of the new flavour, the Westminster Council officers removed the product from the menu to make sure that it was, as they said, \"fit for human consumption.\"Tammy Frissell-Deppe, a family counsellor specialized in attachment parenting, published a book, titled \"A Breastfeeding Mother's Secret Recipes\", providing a lengthy compilation of detailed food and beverage recipes containing human breast milk. Human breast milk is not produced or distributed industrially or commercially, because the use of human breast milk as an adult food is considered unusual to the majority of cultures around the world, and most disapprove of such a practice.\n\nWhile there is no scientific evidence that shows that breast milk is more advantageous for adults than cow's milk, according to several 2015 news sources breast milk is being used by bodybuilders for its nutritional value. In a February 2015 ABC News article one former competitive body builder said, \"It isn’t common, but I’ve known people who have done this. It’s certainly talked about quite a bit on the bodybuilding forums on the Internet.\" Calling bodybuilders \"a strange breed of individuals,” he said, “Even if this type of thing is completely unsupported by research, they’re prone to gym lore and willing to give it a shot if there is any potential effect.” At the time the article was written, in the U.S. the price of breast milk procured from milk banks that pasteurize the milk, and have expensive quality and safety controls, was about $10 an ounce, and the price in the alternative market online, bought directly from mothers, ranges from $1 to $4 per US fluid ounce, compared to cow's milk at about $3.44 a gallon.\n\nA 2015 CBS article cites an editorial led by Dr. Sarah Steele in the Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine, in which they say that \"the health claims do not stand up clinically and that raw human milk purchased online poses many health risks.\" CBS found a study from the Center for Biobehavioral Health at Nationwide Children's Hospital in Columbus that \"found that 11 out of 102 breast milk samples purchased online were actually blended with cow's milk.\" The article also explains that milk purchased online may be improperly sanitized or stored, so it may contain food-borne illness and infectious diseases such as hepatitis and HIV.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "795780", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=795780", "title": "Ethos", "text": "Ethos\n\nEthos ( or ) is a Greek word meaning \"character\" that is used to describe the guiding beliefs or ideals that characterize a community, nation, or ideology. The Greeks also used this word to refer to the power of music to influence emotions, behaviours, and even morals. Early Greek stories of Orpheus exhibit this idea in a compelling way. The word's use in rhetoric is closely based on the Greek terminology used by Aristotle in his concept of the three artistic proofs or modes of persuasion.\n\n\"Ethos\" (, ; \"plurals:\" \"ethe\", ; \"ethea\", ) is a Greek word originally meaning \"accustomed place\" (as in \"the habitats of horses\", \"Iliad\" 6.511, 15.268), \"custom, habit\", equivalent to Latin \"mores\".\n\n\"Ethos\" forms the root of \"ethikos\" (), meaning \"moral, showing moral character\". As an adjective in the neuter plural form \"ta ethika\" (), used for the study of morals, it is the origin of the modern English word \"ethics\".\n\nIn modern usage, ethos denotes the disposition, character, or fundamental values particular to a specific person, people, corporation, culture, or movement. For example, the poet and critic T. S. Eliot wrote in 1940 that \"the general ethos of the people they have to govern determines the behaviour of politicians\". Similarly the historian Orlando Figes wrote in 1996 that in Soviet Russia of the 1920s \"the ethos of the Communist party dominated every aspect of public life\".\nEthos may change in response to new ideas or forces. For example, according to the Jewish historian Afrie Krampf, ideas of economic modernization which were imported into Palestine in the 1930s brought about \"the abandonment of the agrarian ethos and the reception of...the ethos of rapid development\".\n\nIn rhetoric, ethos is one of the three artistic proofs (\"pistis\", πίστις) or modes of persuasion (other principles being \"logos\" and \"pathos\") discussed by Aristotle in 'Rhetoric' as a component of argument. Speakers must establish ethos from the start. This can involve \"moral competence\" only; Aristotle however broadens the concept to include expertise and knowledge. Ethos is limited, in his view, by what the speaker says. Others however contend that a speaker's ethos extends to and is shaped by the overall moral character and history of the speaker—that is, what people think of his or her character before the speech has even begun (cf Isocrates).\n\nAccording to Aristotle, there are three categories of ethos:\n\n\nIn a sense, ethos does not belong to the speaker but to the audience. Thus, it is the audience that determines whether a speaker is a high- or a low-ethos speaker. Violations of ethos include:\n\n\nCompletely dismissing an argument based on any of the above violations of ethos is an informal fallacy (Appeal to motive). The argument may indeed be suspect; but is not, in itself, invalid.\n\nFor Aristotle, a speaker's ethos was a rhetorical strategy employed by an orator whose purpose was to \"inspire trust in his audience\" (\"Rhetorica\" 1380). \"Ethos\" was therefore achieved through the orator's \"good sense, good moral character, and goodwill\", and central to Aristotelian virtue ethics was the notion that this \"good moral character\" was increased in virtuous degree by habit (\"Rhetorica\" 1380). Aristotle links virtue, habituation, and \"ethos\" most succinctly in Book II of \"Nichomachean Ethics\": \"Virtue, then, being of two kinds, intellectual and moral, intellectual virtue in the main owes both its birth and its growth to teaching [...] while moral virtue comes about as a result of habit, whence also its name \"ethike\" is one that is formed by a slight variation from the word \"ethos\" (habit)\" (952). Discussing women and rhetoric, scholar Karlyn Kohrs Campbell notes that entering the public sphere was considered an act of moral transgression for females of the nineteenth century: \"Women who formed moral reform and abolitionist societies, and who made speeches, held conventions, and published newspapers, entered the public sphere and thereby lost their claims to purity and piety\" (13). Crafting an ethos within such restrictive moral codes, therefore, meant adhering to membership of what Nancy Fraser and Michael Warner have theorized as counterpublics. While Warner contends that members of counterpublics are afforded little opportunity to join the dominant public and therefore exert true agency, Nancy Fraser has problematized Habermas's conception of the public sphere as a dominant \"social totality\" by theorizing \"subaltern counterpublics\", which function as alternative publics that represent \"parallel discursive arenas where members of subordinated social groups invent and circulate counterdiscourses, which in turn permit them to formulate oppositional interpretations of their identities, interests, and needs\" (67).\n\nThough feminist rhetorical theorists have begun to offer more nuanced ways to conceive of ethos, they remain cognizant of how these classical associations have shaped and still do shape women's use of the rhetorical tool. Johanna Schmertz draws on Aristotelian ethos to reinterpret the term alongside feminist theories of subjectivity, writing that, \"Instead of following a tradition that, it seems to me, reads ethos somewhat in the manner of an Aristotelian quality proper to the speaker's identity, a quality capable of being deployed as needed to fit a rhetorical situation, I will ask how ethos may be dislodged from identity and read in such a way as to multiply the positions from which women may speak\" (83). Rhetorical scholar and professor Kate Ronald's claim that \"ethos is the appeal residing in the tension between the speaker's private and public self\", (39) also presents a more postmodern view of ethos that links credibility and identity. Similarly, Nedra Reynolds and Susan Jarratt echo this view of ethos as a fluid and dynamic set of identifications, arguing that \"these split selves are guises, but they are not distortions or lies in the philosopher's sense. Rather they are 'deceptions' in the sophistic sense: recognitions of the ways one is positioned multiply differently\" (56).\n\nRhetorical scholar Michael Halloran has argued that the classical understanding of ethos \"emphasizes the conventional rather than the idiosyncratic, the public rather than the private\" (60). Commenting further on the classical etymology and understanding of \"ethos\", Halloran illuminates the interdependence between \"ethos\" and cultural context by arguing that \"To have ethos is to manifest the virtues most valued by the culture to and for which one speaks\" (60). While scholars do not all agree on the dominant sphere in which ethos may be crafted, some agree that ethos is formed through the negotiation between private experience and the public, rhetorical act of self-expression. Karen Burke LeFevre's argument in \"Invention as Social Act\" situates this negotiation between the private and the public, writing that ethos \"appears in that socially created space, in the 'between', the point of intersection between speaker or writer and listener or reader\" (45-46).\n\nAccording to Nedra Reynolds, \"ethos, like postmodern subjectivity, shifts and changes over time, across texts, and around competing spaces\" (336). However, Reynolds additionally discusses how one might clarify the meaning of ethos within rhetoric as expressing inherently communal roots. This stands in direct opposition to what she describes as the claim \"that ethos can be faked or 'manipulated'\" because individuals would be formed by the values of their culture and not the other way around (336). Rhetorical scholar John Oddo also suggests that ethos is negotiated across a community, and not simply a manifestation of the self (47). In the era of mass-mediated communication, Oddo contends, one's ethos is often created by journalists and dispersed over multiple news texts. With this in mind, Oddo coins the term intertextual ethos, the notion that a public figure's \"ethos is constituted within and across a range of mass media voices\" (48).\n\nIn \"Black Women Writers and the Trouble with Ethos\", scholar Coretta Pittman notes that race has been generally absent from theories of ethos construction, and that this concept is troubling for black women. Pittman writes, \"Unfortunately, in the history of race relations in America, black Americans' ethos ranks low among other racial and ethnic groups in the United States. More often than not, their moral characters have been associated with a criminalized and sexualized ethos in visual and print culture\" (43).\n\nThe ways in which characters were constructed is important when considering ethos, or character, in Greek tragedy. Augustus Taber Murray explains that the depiction of a character was limited by the circumstances under which Greek tragedies were presented. These include the single unchanging scene, necessary use of the chorus, small number of characters limiting interaction, large outdoor theatres, and the use of masks, which all influenced characters to be more formal and simple. Murray also declares that the inherent characteristics of Greek tragedies are important in the makeup of the characters. One of these is the fact that tragedy characters were nearly always mythical characters. This limited the character, as well as the plot, to the already well-known myth from which the material of the play was taken. The other characteristic is the relatively short length of most Greek plays. This limited the scope of the play and characterization, so that the characters were defined by one overriding motivation toward a certain objective from the beginning of the play.\n\nHowever, Murray clarifies that strict constancy is not always the rule in Greek tragedy characters. To support this, he points out the example of Antigone who, even though she strongly defies Creon in the beginning of the play, begins to doubt her cause and plead for mercy as she is led to her execution.\n\nSeveral other aspects of the character element in ancient Greek tragedy are worth noting. One of these, which C. Garton discusses, is the fact that either because of contradictory action or incomplete description, the character cannot be viewed as an individual, or the reader is left confused about the character. One method of reconciling this would be to consider these characters to be flat, or type-caste, instead of round. This would mean that most of the information about the character centers around one main quality or viewpoint. Comparable to the flat character option, the reader could also view the character as a symbol. Examples of this might be the Eumenides as vengeance, or Clytemnestra as symbolizing ancestral curse. Yet another means of looking at character, according to Tycho von Wilamowitz and Howald, is the idea that characterisation is not important. This idea is maintained by the theory that the play is meant to affect the viewer or reader scene by scene, with attention being only focused on the section at hand. This point of view also holds that the different figures in a play are only characterised by the situation surrounding them, and only enough so that their actions can be understood.\n\nGaret makes three more observations about character in Greek tragedy. The first is an abundant variety of types of characters in Greek tragedy. His second observation is that the reader or viewer's need for characters to display a unified identity that is similar to human nature is usually fulfilled. Thirdly, characters in tragedies include incongruities and idiosyncrasies.\n\nAnother aspect stated by Garet is that tragedy plays are composed of language, character, and action, and the interactions of these three components; these are fused together throughout the play. He explains that action normally determines the major means of characterisation. Another principle he states is the importance of these three components' effect on each other; the important repercussion of this being character's impact on action.\n\nAugustus Taber Murray also examines the importance and degree of interaction between plot and character. He does this by discussing Aristotle's statements about plot and character in his Poetics: that plot can exist without character, but character cannot exist without plot, and so character is secondary to plot. Murray maintains that Aristotle did not mean that complicated plot should hold the highest place in a tragedy play. This is because the plot was, more often than not, simple and therefore not a major point of tragic interest. Murray conjectures that people today do not accept Aristotle's statement about character and plot because to modern people, the most memorable things about tragedy plays are often the characters. However, Murray does concede that Aristotle is correct in that \"[t]here can be no portrayal of character [...] without at least a skeleton outline of plot\".\n\nEthos, or character, also appears in the visual art of famous or mythological ancient Greek events in murals, on pottery, and sculpture, referred to generally as pictorial narrative. Aristotle even praised the ancient Greek painter Polygnotos because his paintings included characterization. The way in which the subject and his actions are portrayed in visual art can convey the subject's ethical character and through this the work's overall theme, just as effectively as poetry or drama can. This characterisation portrayed men as they ought to be, which is the same as Aristotle's idea of what ethos or character should be in tragedy. (Stansbury-O'Donnell, p. 178) Professor Mark D. Stansbury-O'Donnell states that pictorial narratives often had ethos as its focus, and was therefore concerned with showing the character's moral choices. (Stansbury-O'Donnell, p. 175) David Castriota, agreeing with Stansbury-O'Donnell's statement, says that the main way Aristotle considered poetry and visual arts to be on equal levels was in character representation and its effect on action. However, Castriota also maintains about Aristotle's opinion that \"his interest has to do with the influence that such ethical representation may exert upon the public\". Castriota also explains that according to Aristotle, \"[t]he activity of these artists is to be judged worthy and useful above all because exposure of their work is beneficial to the polis\". Accordingly, this was the reason for the representation of character, or ethos, in public paintings and sculptures. In order to portray the character's choice, the pictorial narrative often shows an earlier scene than when the action was committed. Stansbury-O'Donnell gives an example of this in the form of a picture by the ancient Greek artist Exekia which shows the Greek hero Ajax planting his sword in the ground in preparation to commit suicide, instead of the actual suicide scene. (Stansbury-O'Donnell, p. 177.) Additionally, Castriota explains that ancient Greek art expresses the idea that character was the major factor influencing the outcome of the Greeks' conflicts against their enemies. Because of this, \"ethos was the essential variable in the equation or analogy between myth and actuality\".\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "796129", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=796129", "title": "Japanese television drama", "text": "Japanese television drama\n\n, also called , are television programs that are a staple of Japanese television and are broadcast daily. All major TV networks in Japan produce a variety of drama series including romance, comedy, detective stories, horror, jidaigeki, and many others. Single episode, or \"tanpatsu\" dramas that are usually two hours in length are also broadcast. For special occasions, there may be a one or two-episode drama with a specific theme, such as one produced in 2015 for the 70-year anniversary of the end of World War II.\n\nJapanese drama series are broadcast in three-month seasons: winter (January–March), spring (April–June), summer (July–September), and autumn or fall (October–December). Some series may start in another month though it may still be counted as a series of a specific season. The majority of dramas are aired weekdays in the evenings around 9:00 p.m., 10:00 p.m., or even 11:00 p.m. Dramas shown in the morning or afternoon are generally broadcast daily, and episodes of the same drama can be aired every day for several months, such as NHK's \"asadora\", or morning dramas. The evening dramas air weekly and usually comprise ten to fourteen one-hour long episodes.\n\nIn many cases, instead of being episodic, drama series are serial, with one story running throughout the episodes. Since they are of a fixed length, dramas have a definite ending, and since they are relatively long, they can explore character, situation, and interesting dialog in a way that is less possible in most movies. Structurally, Japanese dramas can be compared to American or British miniseries. Dramas are rarely canceled mid-season, but they usually do not continue into the next season, even if extremely popular. Popular dramas do, however, often give rise to \"specials\" that are made after the final episode if the show has been a huge success. Some genres such as jidaigeki, police procedurals, or family dramas, however, feature series that are episodic or that sometimes continue for years on end, with \"Mito Kōmon\", \"Taiyō ni Hoero!\", or \"Wataru Seken wa Oni Bakari\" being famous examples.\n\nA characteristic of Japanese drama that differentiates it is that each episode is usually shot only a few (two to three) weeks before it is aired. Many fans have even been able to visit their idols while shooting scenes as the show is airing.\n\nMost people associate today's Japanese dramas with the modern style of screenwriting which has coined the term \"trendy dramas\". The ultimate inspirations for many Japanese dramas are \"The Big Chill\" (1983) and \"St. Elmo's Fire\" (1985). The \"trendy\" formula was invented in the late 1980s when screenwriters decided to reach the television audience with themes that covered real-life Japan, at a time when the Japanese were experiencing a bubble economy. The \"trendy\" formula was improved in the early 1990s, when the story lines changed with the times. By gambling on harder issues, including teenage violence, child abuse, and modern family life, the trendy drama formula is tweaked to fit the television viewers' changing taste. Even today, the success of Japanese dramas is a result of sticking with the trendy drama formula. Many of these shows employ young actors who use them as springboards to bigger projects.\n\nAlthough some people consider Super Sentai and tokusatsu type shows as dramas, they do not fit the \"trendy\" definition. Generally, most evening dramas aired nowadays are \"trendy dramas\", and the term does not apply to other types of dramas such as \"asadora\".\n\nDramas that are broadcast on Fuji Television (Fuji TV) and NTV are usually the most popular. Although TBS has produced some very successful dramas in the past and continues to produce some popular dramas, in recent years, its ratings successes have been gradually dwindling and have been overtaken by NTV. \n\nFuji TV is widely known as the inventor of the drama formula. During the 1980s and 1990s, Fuji TV popularized the trendy dramas with their use of young and popular actors/actresses. The network's 9:00 p.m. dramas shown on Monday nights are commonly called \"Getsuku\" (a shortened phrase meaning Monday at 9). The dramas usually involve a love story. It is considered to be a very popular time slot for dramas, generally bringing in a high rating during the season. However, in recent years, the popularity of \"Getsuku\" dramas has worn off, with most dramas not crossing the 20% mark for average rating. \n\nOther Japan television networks have their own focuses. TV Asahi, for example, focus heavily on jidaigeki and crime stories (one example of the latter is the long-running \"Aibō\", now on its 13th season). NHK puts more effort into programming that reaches an older demographic, focusing mostly on epic period shows of historical significance, often with all-star casts, called \"taiga\" dramas, as well as inspiring dramas that focus on a young, strong-willed hero or heroine.\n\nTheme music and background music set the overall tone of Japanese drama series. Most dramas will start off with one or two minutes of theme music during the opening credits. Other dramas will have, at the very least a catchy melody in the beginning, displaying the show's name for a few seconds, and then one to two minutes of ending theme music during the closing credits. Background music is placed and used at strategic points of the episode to set the mood.\n\nThere is a sub-genre of Japanese drama fans that are also huge fans of the drama's original soundtrack. Most television networks work with music companies to produce original soundtracks. Most opening and closing theme music is written especially for the drama series, while other theme music is licensed from other sources. Once the library is put together, the television network will release the original soundtrack compact disc, usually a few weeks after the start of the drama. Closing themes are often sung by a popular J-pop singer or band.\n\nNHK produces its own theme music and is one of the only Japanese television networks that has its own orchestra. Most of the theme music heard in their taiga and asadora dramas were written and produced in-house.\n\nIn recent years, many theme songs have been licensed from sources outside Japan. In some instances, theme songs have been licensed from some of the biggest names in the Western recording industry. This practice has disadvantages. When the Japanese drama is licensed outside Japan, theme music licensing becomes very costly. For example, in the Fuji TV drama \"Densha Otoko\", the opening song and some of the background music had to be replaced in the release that aired on the Nippon Golden Network because they couldn't get the rights to them.\n\nAs in many other countries, Japanese television is arguably the most important media type. A survey completed in 2000 by NHK, Japan's public broadcasting network, showed that 95% of Japanese people watch television every day. Eighty-six percent said they consider television an indispensable medium, and 68% said the same of newspapers. There are other forms of media that can be used to promote products and services, such as the Internet. However, Shinji Takada, a television executive at Nippon Television (NTV), believes that although the Internet is popular among drama fans, \"We don't regard broadband as mainstream media. It will never happen. Broadband is a complementary medium.\"\n\nTelevision ratings are calculated by several researching firms. Video Research Ltd. is one of the more reliable firms. More television networks, advertisers, and Japanese drama fans use the numbers from this firm than any other. The ratings focus on the Kanto (Tokyo) and the Kansai (Osaka) areas, which are believed to be a good representation of what most of Japan watches. The ratings become available for the general public every Wednesday.\n\nThe rating system is very simple. All the major Japanese television networks make up the television market, so a research firm must determine the size of an average audience. The audience size is determined using two factors: the amount of content that is transmitted and the amount that is received, as market size varies from firm to firm. The viewer count of a given episode is calculated using a variety of polling methods. Ratings are calculated using a percentage or point system. This is based on the episode's viewership numbers divided by the market size. Finally, the numbers are published on the research firm's website. A hard copy is also produced.\n\nThere is no solid science on how to interpret these rating percentages. For fans, simply the drama with the highest percentage is the \"winner\" for the week. The fans use these numbers to decide which dramas they should watch during the remainder of the season. Despite this simple interpretation, there are one or more factors that may come into play that explain why some dramas receive higher percentage points than others. For example, evening dramas draw better ratings than those that air in the mornings and afternoons. Although the transmission size is virtually the same in the mornings, afternoons and evenings, the evenings draw higher numbers because most evening viewers work during the day, and fewer people are at home watching television. There are, however, some exceptions: For example, the NHK Asadora drama \"Oshin\" drew an average rating percentage of 52.6%, a number that would be extremely good for an evening drama but even more extraordinary for a drama that airs in the mornings and six days a week.\n\nFinally, rating percentage plays a heavy role in the success of a drama artist. The numbers of an artist's previous work are used by TV producers to determine whether or not the artist is a marketing success. If the ratings drawn by the artist's previous work are good, he or she will receive offers to star in dramas that are better written and produced.\n\nIn evening dramas, the cast members are carefully selected and tend to be famous actors that audiences are very fond of. The choice of cast members frequently affects the drama's audience rating, and pairing the right male and female artists is especially important in a renzoku ren'ai (romantic or love) drama. Cast members of morning and afternoon dramas are not as popular as those of evening dramas, as reflected by the ratings, but with time good actors gain popularity.\n\nExtra effort is put into dramas that air during the winter season, as viewers tend to stay at home more during the colder winter months.\n\nMost Japanese dramas don't start exactly on the hour or half-hour mark. Instead, some episodes start at 8:58 p.m., while others start at 9:05 p.m. Before television ratings started to matter, episodes started exactly on the hour. Later, because of the aggressive TV ratings war, some stations decided to beat the competition by starting their shows a few minutes earlier. The theory behind this practice is that when a show ends a few minutes before the hour or half-hour, a viewer would start changing channels until they found one that wasn't showing any commercials. Similarly, if an episode runs a few minutes past the hour or half-hour, viewers are more likely to watch the next program because they missed the first few minutes of an episode on a different channel.\n\nThe exception to this trend is NHK, which continues to start their shows exactly on each hour or half-hour. Potential reasoning behind this is that because every other television station is constantly changing its start times, this strategy no longer holds the potential advantage over competition that it once did.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "796770", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=796770", "title": "Pelmeni", "text": "Pelmeni\n\nPelmeni (;  — plural, пельмень  — singular) are dumplings of Russian cuisine which consist of a filling wrapped in thin, unleavened dough. \n\nThe debate about the exact place of origin is still active, with Ural and Siberia both maintaining strong claims. Pelmeni are considered as the heart of Russian cuisine.\n\nThe dough is made from flour and water, sometimes adding a small portion of eggs.\n\nThe filling can be minced meat (pork, lamb, beef, or any other kind of meat, venison being particularly traditional), or fish. The mixing together of different kinds of meat is also popular. The traditional Udmurt recipe requires a mixture of 45% beef, 35% mutton, and 20% pork. Various spices, such as black pepper and diced onions as well as garlic, are mixed into the filling.\n\nThe Ural region seems to be the origin place of the pelmeni. The word pelmeni is derived from \"pel'n'an\"' (пельнянь)—literally \"ear bread\" in the native Finno-Ugric Komi and Udmurt languages. It is unclear when pelmeni entered the cuisines of the indigenous Siberian people and when they first appeared in Russian cuisine. One theory suggests pelmeni, or stuffed boiled dumplings in general, originated in Siberia, possibly a simplified adaptation of the Chinese jiaozi (in some dialects it is called Bāomiàn \"包面\"). Another theory suggests that pelmeni were carried by the Mongols to Siberia and the Urals, from where they gradually spread as far as Eastern Europe. Pelmeni became especially popular by Russian hunters.\n\nPelmeni are particularly good means of quickly preserving meat during long Siberian winter, especially eliminating the need to feed livestock during the long winter months. Thus, despite their Uralic origin, pelmeni were much influenced by the Siberian way of cooking.\n\nPelmeni belong to the family of dumplings, and are related to Ukrainian \"varenyky\" and Polish \"pierogi\". In the United States and Canada, the term \"pierogi\" or \"perogies\" is often used to describe all kinds of Eastern European dumplings, regardless of the shape, size, or filling. Pelmeni are also similar to Mongolian \"bansh\", Chinese \"jiaozi\" (Cantonese \"gaau\") or Chinese \"húndùn\" (Cantonese wonton). They are cousins to the Turkish and Kazakh \"manti\", the Nepalese and Tibetan \"momo\", the Uyghur and Uzbek \"chuchvara\", the Korean \"mandu\", and the Japanese \"gyoza\" and Italian \"tortellini\". Somewhat similar are the fried or baked \"empanadas\" encountered in Hispanic-influenced cultures.\n\nThe most important difference between pelmeni, \"varenyky\", and \"pierogi\" is the thickness of the dough shell—in pelmeni and vareniki this is as thin as possible, and the proportion of filling to dough is usually higher. Pelmeni are never served with a sweet filling, which distinguishes them from \"vareniki\" and Polish \"pierogi\", which sometimes are. Also, the fillings in pelmeni are usually raw, while the fillings of \"vareniki\" and \"pierogi\" are typically precooked.\n\nThe main difference between pelmeni and momos is their size—a typical pelmeni is about in diameter, whereas momos are often at least twice that size.\n\nIn Siberia, pelmeni are traditionally frozen outdoors in the winter and treated as preserved food. Hunters or explorers heading into the taiga would carry sacks of frozen pelmeni with their provisions as easily cooked, nonperishable food. Pelmeni can be stored frozen for a long time and they are prepared immediately before eating by boiling in salted water until they float, and then two to five minutes more. Regional differences exist in the boiling of pelmeni. In the Urals, they are always boiled in water, while in Siberia they are boiled in salted water or sometimes meat or chicken broth. The cooked pelmeni are served on their own or topped with melted butter or smetana (sour cream). Mustard, horseradish, tomato sauce, and vinegar are popular, as well. The Russian émigré community in Australia, most of whom originally traveled through China, generally adds soy sauce, as do the people of the Russian Far East. Some recipes suggest frying pelmeni after boiling until they turn golden brown. Pelmeni can also be served in a clear soup, although in Siberia this is considered in poor taste and pelmeni are carefully strained before serving. In Tatar cuisine, \"Pilmän\" (the Tatar equivalent of pelmeni) are a traditional dish, where they have always been served with clear soup and added dill or other freshly cut herbs.\n\nPacked frozen, pelmeni can be found in Russian and Ukrainian food stores, as well as everywhere Russian communities exist. Packets of frozen pelmeni are usually labeled \"Siberian pelmeni\" because of the Siberian practice of storing and transporting pelmeni in frozen form. Store-bought pelmeni are made on industrial machinery, much of which is made by Italian companies such as Arienti and Cattaneo, Ima, Ostoni, Zamboni, etc. These pelmeni usually weigh around 15 grams (½ oz) each and look like a larger version of tortellini, which is why, for industrial production, Italian pasta machines are commonly used. Pelmeni are also commonly made at home. The easiest (if somewhat laborious) way is simply to make them by hand; many cooks use specialized \"pelmeni makers\" (), which are essentially molds that resemble muffin pans or ravioli molds, allowing one to quickly make a few dozen pelmeni out of two sheets of dough and a quantity of ground meat.\n\nIn modern Russian and Ukrainian culture, and also in the Baltic states, store-bought pelmeni are considered a kind of convenience food and are associated with students' or bachelors' lifestyles, much like instant ramen, etc.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "796863", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=796863", "title": "Bosna (sausage)", "text": "Bosna (sausage)\n\nBosna (sometimes Bosner) is a spicy Austrian fast food dish, said to have originated in either Salzburg or Linz. It is now popular all over western Austria and southern Bavaria.\n\nIt resembles a hot dog, consisting mainly of a Bratwurst sausage, onions and a blend of mustard and/or tomato ketchup and curry powder (Curry ketchup). Bosna is made with white bread and is usually grilled briefly before serving.\n\nSeveral variations of the dish exist:\n\n"}
{"id": "797470", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=797470", "title": "Fromage blanc", "text": "Fromage blanc\n\nFromage blanc (; ; also known as maquée) is a fresh cheese originating from the north of France and the south of Belgium. The name means \"white cheese\" in French. \"Fromage frais\" (\"fresh cheese\") differs from \"fromage blanc\" in that, according to French legislation, \"fromage frais\" must contain live cultures when sold, whereas with \"fromage blanc\", fermentation has been halted.\n\n\"Fromage blanc\" is a creamy soft cheese made with whole or skimmed milk and cream. It is similar to some kinds of quark. Pure \"fromage blanc\" is virtually fat free, but cream is frequently added to improve the flavour, which also increases the fat content, frequently to as high as 8% of total weight.\n\n\"Fromage blanc\" can be served either as a dessert similar to yogurt, frequently with added fruit, spread on bread, usually over or under jam, or used in savoury dishes. In many Western countries, \"fromage blanc\" is sold in supermarkets alongside yogurts.\n\n"}
{"id": "797675", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=797675", "title": "Pitchout", "text": "Pitchout\n\nIn baseball, a pitchout is a ball that is intentionally thrown high and outside the strike zone with the purpose of preventing a stolen base, thwarting a hit and run, or to prevent a run-scoring play on a suicide squeeze play. The pitcher delivers the ball in such a manner for it to be unhittable and in a position where the catcher can quickly leap to his feet to catch it. A well-thrown pitchout will allow the catcher to receive the ball standing up as opposed to his usual squat, giving him a better line to throw to a base without the pitcher or the batter obstructing his vision or aim. Moreover, it is easier to throw a ball with more force from a standing position than it is from a squat, which is why most catchers leap to their feet when attempting to throw out a base stealer. A pitchout is a type of intentional ball, but differs in that a pitchout is thrown harder to give the catcher the most time to throw out the base runner.\n\nThe pitchout can be called for when the manager or catcher believes that an existing baserunner is likely to attempt a steal, and forms one of the two (with the pickoff) main countermeasures a pitcher can take against a potential stealer. A runner attempting to steal on a pitchout will have a more difficult time beating the throw to second base and almost no chance of stealing third barring a mistake by the catcher or the third baseman.\n\nThe pitchout can also be used against the hit and run. As the pitch is unhittable, the runner will have to attempt a straight steal against a prepared catcher. On a suicide squeeze play, when the runner is already running from third once the pitch has been thrown, a pitchout can be used to prevent the batter from being able to bunt the ball, allowing the catcher to tag the runner trying to score.\n\nPitchouts have become less frequent in Major League Baseball games than they were in the 1980s and before; sabermetricians have questioned their effectiveness. Around 1990, pitchouts could be seen in 8 MLB games out of every 10 on average; by 2015, that figure has fallen to 1 out of every 10. While pitchouts do help catch stealing runners - the rate caught stealing goes from 27% on non-pitchouts to 52% from data from 2011-2015 - stealing in general is less common than it was in the 1980s. Thus, the risk of granting the batter a free ball when no stealing attempt is actually being made is higher, and runners who steal frequently - the most important reason to use a pitchout - appear in fewer games.\n"}
{"id": "797716", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=797716", "title": "Gulyásleves", "text": "Gulyásleves\n\nGulyásleves (\"gulyás\" is herdsman, \"leves\" is soup in Hungarian), is a Hungarian soup, made of beef, vegetables, ground paprika and other spices. It originates from a dish cooked by the cattlemen (\"gulyás\" also means herdsman) who tended their herds in the Great Hungarian Plain, known as the \"Alföld\" or \"Puszta\" in Hungarian. These Hungarian cowboys often camped out with their cattle days away from populated areas, so they had to make their food from ingredients they could carry with themselves, and this food had to be cooked in the one available portable cauldron (called \"bogrács\") over an open fire.\n\nThe word \"bogrács\" is a loanword from Ottoman Turkish باقراج (spelled \"bakraç\" in modern Turkish), meaning a cauldron made of copper; from the word \"copper\" in Old Turkish language (spelled \"bakır\" in modern Turkish).\n\nThe original dish called \"bográcsgulyás\" was a stew, not a soup. Traditional Hungarian \"bográcsgulyás\" (cauldron gulyás) is often still cooked outdoors over an open fire in a cauldron, a Hungarian style \"Barbecue\".\nLater on when the dish left the peasant cuisines and became popular even in the town, it started to be cooked more like a soup. Nowadays the dish served in the Hungarian restaurants is a soup, but the locals cook the dish called \"gulyás \" as a stew and \"gulyásleves\" (\"leves\" means soup) like a soup.\n\nThere are different variations of the recipe. The meat is beef, but often mixed meats are used (e.g. beef, pork and mutton/lamb). Tomatoes, carrots and fresh peppers (often hot chilies) are also added. Onions, paprika and caraway seeds provide its flavour. Cubed potatoes or pasta squares are typically added to this spicy soup. This dish is not to be confused with other dishes called \"pörkölt\" or \"paprikás\".\n\n"}
{"id": "797963", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=797963", "title": "Rolling Rock", "text": "Rolling Rock\n\nRolling Rock is a 4.4% abv American lager launched in 1939 by the Latrobe Brewing Company. Although founded as a local beer in Western Pennsylvania, it was marketed aggressively and eventually became a national product. The brand was sold to Anheuser-Busch of St. Louis, Missouri, in mid-2006, which transferred brewing operations to New Jersey while continuing to label the new beer prominently with the name of Latrobe.\n\nFrom 1939 until July 26, 2006, Rolling Rock was brewed at the Latrobe Brewing Company in Latrobe, Pennsylvania, a small city 34 miles ESE of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. As stated on the bottle, it was brewed with a distinctive soft local water in large glass-lined tanks, which were considered state-of-the-art at the time of its introduction (in part due to sanitation concerns).\n\nOn May 19, 2006, Anheuser-Busch purchased the Rolling Rock and Rolling Rock Green Light brands from InBev for $82 million and began brewing Rolling Rock at its Newark facility in mid July, 2006. As a result, this once distinctive semi-premium beer became virtually indistinguishable in flavor and quality from the least expensive light beers manufactured by Anheuser. The final batch of Rolling Rock was shipped from Latrobe on July 31, 2006. Union leaders in Westmoreland County organized a nationwide boycott of Anheuser-Busch and InBev brands because of the move. Anheuser-Busch has said that Rolling Rock's original pledge on the label will be preceded by these words: \"To honor the tradition of this great brand, we quote from the original pledge of quality.\" The quoted pledge presented in the guise of a tribute now serves to mislead the public in as much as the beer is not in fact brewed in Latrobe any longer, nor is it brewed from local mountain water, nor in glass tanks. In July 2008, InBev reached a deal to acquire Anheuser-Busch, thereby returning ownership of Rolling Rock to InBev, now known as Anheuser–Busch InBev and based in Belgium.\n\nIn 2009, Anheuser-Busch InBev announced that it was exploring the sale of the Rolling Rock brand. In 2015, Anheuser-Busch stopped brewing bottled Rolling Rock in glass-lined tanks. Only the canned beer was now being brewed using the traditional process.\n\nRolling Rock's pony bottle had been very popular until its discontinuation, so much so that this had given rise to the folk etymology that \"pony\" is from the Rolling Rock horse logo. This is incorrect: the term \"pony\" in \"pony of beer\" has been used in the United States of America since the 19th century, predating Rolling Rock by over 50 years, and is due to the diminutive size; similar words include pony glass and pony keg. Indeed, advertising for Rolling Rock from the 1950s uses the term \"pony bottle\" generically, stating \"... Rolling Rock is the Largest Selling 7 oz. Pony Bottle of Premium Beer in Pennsylvania\".\n\nThough it did not originate the term, the popularity of Rolling Rock doubtless reinforced it: one could refer to a regular (12 oz.) or small (7 oz.) of the beer as a \"horse\" or \"pony\" respectively. It also likely lead to the standardization on a 7 oz. size: major national brands introduced 7 oz. pony bottles in the early 1970s, of which the most prominent is Miller High Life (pony introduced 1972).\n\nThe number 33 is printed prominently on all bottles of Rolling Rock. Many have speculated on the significance of the number 33: that the \"33\" refers to 1933, the founding year of the Pittsburgh Steelers (who hold their annual training camp at Saint Vincent College in Latrobe, PA); that 33 degrees is the proper temperature to keep beer; the 33 degrees of Scottish Rite Freemasonry; that Latrobe test-brewed 33 batches of beer before coming up with the final formula for Rolling Rock. Other theories concerning the number 33 are that there were exactly 33 stairsteps from the brewmaster's office to the brewing floor in the original Latrobe brewery. Also that the Pennsylvania fish and game commission at the turn of the century numbered the streams within the commonwealth and the water that was used to brew this beer was taken from the stream numbered 33.\n\nThe words \"Rolling Rock\" appear three times on the bottle for a total of 33 letters.\n\nOne widely held belief is that it marks the repeal of prohibition in 1933.\n\nJames L. Tito, former CEO of Latrobe Brewing, opined that the \"33\" signifies the 33 words in the beer's original pledge of quality, which is still printed on every bottle:\n\nWhile the original wording on the label was somewhat different, it also contained the 33 following words:\n\nThis was followed by the \"33\". The current pledge is on the 12 oz. bottles, while the \"little nip\" pledge is from the 7 oz. bottle version.\n\nA founding executive is said to have written \"33\" at the end of the slogan to indicate the number of words it comprised as a guide for the bottle printers. They assumed it was part of the text and incorporated it into the label graphics. Hence, the first batch of bottles carried the number \"33\" and they remained that way since they were continually collected and reused.\n\nTito admitted, however, that there is no hard proof for this theory, and that at this point no one really knows what the true origin of the \"33\" may have been. Nonetheless, the tradition of the printing explanation has been sustained by the company as the wording on the labels has changed over the years, and the verbiage is carefully structured to retain a length of 33 words. The Rolling Rock nomenclature on the bottles was painted on, not paper or plastic.\n\nAnheuser-Busch introduced a red lager version of Rolling Rock called Rolling Rock Red. While the number 33 has been a traditional part of Rolling Rock iconography, Rolling Rock Red's label has a \"3\", presumably signifying the name of the beverage (\"Rolling Rock Red\") or the words in the tagline \"Finely Crafted Lager\", which appears only on the Rolling Rock Red bottles.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "798684", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=798684", "title": "Pumpernickel", "text": "Pumpernickel\n\nPumpernickel (; ) is a typically heavy, slightly sweet rye bread traditionally made with sourdough starter and coarsely ground rye. It is often made today with a combination of rye flour and whole rye berries.\n\nAt one time it was traditional peasant fare, but largely during the 20th century various forms became popular through delicatessens and supermarkets. Present-day European and North American pumpernickel differ in several characteristics, including the use of additional leaveners, and, in North America, coloring and flavoring agents, the addition of wheat flour, higher baking temperature, and a dramatically shortened baking time.\n\nThe word stems from an old Bavarian term for \"hard\", either referring to the process used to grind the grain into flour, or the density of the final bread product. According to \"Langenscheidts Taschen Wörterbücher\" (1956), it refers to a form of \"pumping work\".\nThe philologist Johann Christoph Adelung states that the word has an origin in the Germanic vernacular where was a New High German synonym for being flatulent, and was a form of the name Nicholas, commonly associated with a goblin or devil (e.g. \"Old Nick\", a familiar name for Satan), or more generally for a malevolent spirit or demon. Hence, \"pumpernickel\" means \"devil's fart\", a definition accepted by the publisher Random House, and by some English language dictionaries, including the Merriam-Webster Dictionary. The American Heritage Dictionary adds \"so named from being hard to digest\". A variant of this explanation is also given by the German etymological dictionary \"Kluge\" that says the word is older than its usage for the particular type of bread, and may have been used as a mocking name for a person of unrefined manners (\"farting Nick\") first. The change of meaning may have been caused by its use as a mocking expression for the (in the eyes of outsiders) unrefined rye bread produced by the Westphalian population.\n\nThe Oxford English Dictionary does not commit to any particular etymology for the word. It suggests it may mean a lout or booby, but also says \"origin uncertain\". The OED currently states the first use in English was in 1756.\n\nA false folk etymology involves Napoleon, who, while invading Germany, asked for bread and was served dark Westphalian rye. According to the folktale, Napoleon declared that this was not suitable bread for himself, the emperor, but was bread () for Nickel (or Nicole), his horse: \"\". In a variation of the same basic story, Napoleon declared that the bread was no good for him, but was only good () for his horse: \"\". However, the name \"Nickel\" is not confirmed for any of Napoleon's many horses. Additional folk etymology grew from a \"witty interpretation\", proposed by seventeenth-century satirist Johann Balthasar Schupp, that the bread was only \"good for \"Nicol\"\", a nickname for a weak or puny horse.\n\nPumpernickel has been long associated with the Westphalia region of Germany, first referred to in print in 1450. Although it is not known whether this and other early references refer to precisely the bread that came to be known as \"Pumpernickel\", Westphalian pumpernickel is distinguished by use of coarse rye meal and a very long baking period, which gives the bread its characteristic dark color. Like most traditional all-rye breads, pumpernickel is traditionally made with an acidic sourdough starter, which preserves dough structure by counteracting highly active rye amylases. That method is sometimes augmented or replaced in commercial baking by adding citric acid or lactic acid along with commercial yeast.\n\nTraditional German pumpernickel contains no coloring agents, instead relying on the Maillard reaction to produce its characteristic deep brown color, sweet, dark chocolate, coffee flavor, and earthy aroma. To achieve this, loaves are baked in long narrow lidded pans 16 to 24 hours in a low-temperature (about ), steam-filled oven. Like the French \"pain de mie\", Westphalian pumpernickel has little or no crust. It is very similar to rye \"Vollkornbrot\", a dense rye bread with large amounts of whole grains added.\n\nPumpernickel varieties are popular in the Netherlands, under the name , where it has been a common part of the diet for centuries, and in Denmark where is a staple. German pumpernickel is often sold sliced in small packets in supermarkets, where it may be paired with caviar, smoked salmon, sturgeon, and other expensive products on an hors d'oeuvres tray.\n\nWhile some commercial bakeries mass produce pumpernickel bread for wholesale, many American shops, stores, and families use traditional recipes and bake times. Some mass produced pumpernickel in North America may incorporate natural colorants such as molasses, caramel color, coffee, or cocoa powder among others to imitate the various shades of brown of traditional German pumpernickel. As is common modern commercial baking practice, commercial bakeries the world over often add wheat flour to provide gluten structure and increase rise, and commercial yeast to quicken the rise, compared to a traditional sourdough. To increase production and profits the slow baking characteristic of German pumpernickel is foregone, resulting in a loaf indiscernible from dark rye bread. Some shops and boutique bakeries in America still use centuries old recipes, often times also selling other German foods.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "799541", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=799541", "title": "Mint (candy)", "text": "Mint (candy)\n\nA mint is a food item often consumed as an after-meal refreshment or before business and social engagements to improve breath odor. Mints are commonly believed to soothe the stomach given their association with natural byproducts of the plant genus Mentha. Mints sometimes contain derivatives from plants such as peppermint oil or spearmint oil, or wintergreen from the plant genus Gaultheria. However, many of the most popular mints citing these natural sources contain none in their ingredient list or contain only trace amounts. \n\nThe production of mints as a discrete food item can be traced back to the 18th Century. The popularity of mints took off in the early 20th Century, with the advent of mass urbanization and mass marketing. Advertising for mints focused on their convenience, and on the socially isolating effects of bad breath. These advertisements targeted young people generally, and young women particularly. \n\nMints have been offered in a variety of packaging, usually in an effort to promote portability. Early producers used cardboard boxes and tins, which have remained popular. More recent packaging solutions have included \"rolls\" containing many mints stacked in one package composed of paper or foil, plastic boxes, and individually wrapped mints. Mint sales have remained robust in the 21st century.\n\nHard mints are hard candies or boiled sweets flavored with mint. Examples of hard mints include starlight mints, also known as pinwheel mints, white, circular, with red or green rays emitting from the middle; candy canes; humbugs; and brand name mints such as Altoids and Ice Breakers.\n\nIn addition to breath freshening, mints that actually contain peppermint oil or extract have been popular in helping with digestion after a meal. Peppermint has muscle relaxant properties and therefore may relax the smooth muscles of the GI tract, allowing for easier passage of food contents. However, since the lower esophageal sphincter may be relaxed, peppermint may aggravate \"heartburn\" or GERD.\n\nPeppermint also seems to be effective in relieving intestinal gas and indigestion. According to the German Commission E Monograph, real peppermint oil or extract has been used for cramp-like complaints in the gastrointestinal tract. This can help to explain why mints with real peppermint oil, in addition to peppermint tea, have been popular for and are frequently used after meals to help with digestion as well as to help freshen the breath.\n\nSoft mints, such as \"dinner mints\" and \"butter mints\", are soft candies, often with a higher butter content, that dissolve more readily inside one's mouth.\n\nA \"scotch mint\" or \"pan drop\" is a white round candy with a hard shell but fairly soft chewy middle, popular in Great Britain and other Commonwealth nations and in Europe. Scotch mints were traditionally spheroids, more recently moving toward a larger, discoid shape. The name \"scotch mint\" comes from the specific mint plant \"Mentha × gracilis\". The company Perfetti Van Melle markets scotch mints in a variety of flavours as Mentos candies.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "799693", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=799693", "title": "White pudding", "text": "White pudding\n\nWhite pudding, oatmeal pudding or (in Scotland) mealy pudding is a meat dish popular in Scotland, Ireland, Northumberland, Nova Scotia, and Newfoundland. \n\nWhite pudding is broadly similar to black pudding, but does not include blood. Modern recipes consist of suet or fat, oatmeal, breadcrumbs and in some cases pork and pork liver, filled into a natural or cellulose sausage casing. Recipes in previous centuries included a wider range of ingredients.\n\nWhite pudding is often thought of as a very old dish that, like black pudding, was a traditional way of making use of offal following the annual slaughter of livestock. Whereas black pudding-type recipes appear in Roman sources, white pudding likely has specifically medieval origins, possibly as a culinary descendant of medieval sweetened blancmange-type recipes combining shredded chicken, rice and almonds, or as a way of lightening up offal with the addition of cream, eggs and breadcrumbs. Meatless versions were common, as they could be eaten during the Lenten period of abstinence. Many older recipes are sweetened: a 15th century British pudding combined pork liver, cream, eggs, breadcrumbs, raisins and dates, while a 1588 recipe collection featured a white pudding made of beef suet, breadcrumbs, egg yolk and currants, flavoured with nutmeg, sugar and cinnamon. A similar recipe given in Woolley's 1670 book \"The Queen-Like Closet\" used hog's lights and was filled into intestine sausage-skins. By the mid-18th century, Elizabeth Raffald's white pudding recipe, \"White Puddings in Skins\", combined rice, lard, ground almonds, currants and egg, using sugar, nutmeg, cinnamon and mace as flavourings: by this period the inclusion of offal such as liver or lights, as well as sweet flavourings, was becoming rarer.\n\nAlongside these more refined and elaborate recipes, a simpler form of white pudding was popular in Ireland, Scotland, and some parts of Northern England, combining suet, oatmeal, seasoning and onions, in sheep's or cow's intestines. In Gaelic speaking parts of Scotland they were referred to by the name \"marag gheal\". These oatmeal-based puddings survived into modern Irish and Scottish cuisine, although with significant regional differences. Modern commercially made Scottish white puddings are generally based on oatmeal, onions, and beef suet; the same mixture simply fried in a pan is known as skirlie. In Ireland, white puddings also include a substantial proportion of pork or pork liver and pork fat. Most modern white puddings are filled into a synthetic cellulose casing and boiled or steamed; typical spices used include white pepper, nutmeg, and sage.\n\nWhite pudding may be cooked whole, or cut into slices and fried or grilled. Irish white pudding is an important feature of the traditional Irish breakfast. Scottish white pudding is often served, like skirlie, with minced beef and potatoes, or is available deep fried in many chip shops.\n\nWhite puddings were once also associated with south-western England: Taylor, in the 17th century, mentions \"the white puddings of Somersetshire\". Hog's pudding, still made in Somerset, Cornwall and Devon, is very similar to other white puddings although is somewhat more highly spiced.\n\nAnother Scottish variant, fruit pudding, includes dried fruit in addition to beef suet and oatmeal.\n\n"}
{"id": "800169", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=800169", "title": "Panini (sandwich)", "text": "Panini (sandwich)\n\nA panini (from the Italian ' , meaning \"small bread, bread rolls\" ) or panino (meaning \"bread roll\" ) is a sandwich made with Italian bread (such as ciabatta, and michetta), usually served warmed by grilling or toasting.\n\nHowever, in many English-speaking countries, a panini is a grilled sandwich made from many types of bread. Examples of bread types used for modern panini are baguette, ciabatta, and michetta. The bread is cut horizontally and filled with deli ingredients such as cheese, ham, mortadella, salami, or other food, and often served warm after having been pressed by a warming grill.\n\nPanini is a word of Italian origin. In Italian the noun \"panino\" (; plural \"panini\") is a diminutive of \"pane\" (\"bread\") and refers to a bread roll. \"Panino imbottito\" (\"stuffed panino\") refers to a sandwich, but the word \"panino\" is also often used alone to indicate a sandwich in general. Similar to panino is \"tramezzino\", a triangular or square sandwich made up of two slices of soft white bread with the crusts removed.\n\nIn English-speaking countries, \"panini\" is widely used as the singular form, with the plural form \"panini\" or \"paninis\", though some speakers use singular \"panino\" and plural \"panini\" as in Italian.\n\nAlthough the first U.S. reference to \"panini\" dates to 1956, and a precursor appeared in a 16th-century Italian cookbook, the sandwiches became trendy in Milanese bars, called \"paninoteche\", in the 1970s and 1980s. Trendy U.S. restaurants began selling panini, with distinctive variations appearing in various cities.\n\nDuring the 1980s, the term \"paninaro\" arose in Italy to denote a member of a youth culture represented by patrons of sandwich bars such as Milan's \"Al Panino\" and Italy's first US-style fast food restaurants. \"Paninari\" were depicted as right-leaning, fashion-fixated individuals, delighting in showcasing early 1980s consumer goods as status symbols.\n\nA panini press or grill is a contact grill for heating sandwiches, meat products, vegetables, and specialty menu items, nearly always with electric elements, comprising a heated bottom plate that is fixed, and a heated top plate that closes towards the bottom plate and comes in contact with the food. The function of the panini grill is to heat food to an appropriate internal temperature with desirable external characteristics (i.e. melted cheese, crisp finish, grill marks).\n\n"}
{"id": "800845", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=800845", "title": "Roast chicken", "text": "Roast chicken\n\nRoast chicken is chicken prepared as food by roasting whether in a home kitchen, over a fire, or with a professional rotisserie (rotary spit). Generally, the chicken is roasted with its own fat and juices by circulating the meat during roasting, and therefore, are usually cooked exposed to fire or heat with some type of rotary grill so that the circulation of these fats and juices is as efficient as possible. Roast chicken is a dish that appears in a wide variety of cuisines worldwide.\n\nHendl is the Austro-Bavarian word for chicken, most commonly in its roasted form (\"Brathendl\"). Another popular form is the fried \"Backhendl\" () version, a specialty of the Viennese cuisine. The Standard German term is \"Hähnchen\" (\"cockerel\"). In the new states of Germany it is often called \"Broiler\".\n\nHendls are traditionally served in Bavarian beer gardens or at festivals such as Oktoberfest, and are generally eaten with a \"Brezen\" and/or a \"Maß\" of beer. They are also widely available from mobile rotisserie trucks that park near well-frequented locations such as supermarkets or large parking lots.\n\nPaprika Hendl (paprika chicken) is mentioned in Bram Stoker's \"Dracula\", as a dish enjoyed by J. Harker who wishes to get the recipe for his wife-to-be, Mina. \n\nPollo a la Brasa, also known as Peruvian chicken or Blackened chicken in the United States and charcoal chicken in Australia. The original version consisted of a chicken cooked in charcoal but the preparation has evolved and marinated meat is now roasted in the heat of the coals of a special oven called a \"rotombo\" which rotates the bird on its own axis, consistently receiving heat from the coals. The oven can be operated using coal, gas, or wood, with the more traditional wood being from the \"Prosopis pallida\" tree.\n\nRotisserie chicken has become a growing trend in the United States since the mid 1990s. American supermarkets commonly roast rotisserie chickens using either horizontal or vertical rotisseries. These chickens are a means of using unsold fresh chickens and are often sold at lower prices than fresh chickens. Wholesale club Costco does not recycle fresh chickens but is noted for selling 60 million of its US$4.99 whole roasted chickens each year. The Boston Market fast casual restaurant chain originally specialized in roast chicken.\nTandoori chicken is a dish popular on the Indian subcontinent consisting of chicken roasted in a cylindrical clay oven, a tandoor, and prepared with yogurt and spices. \n\nThe Levantine Arab shawarma, Turkish döner kebap and Greek gyros can be made from a variety of meats, one of which is chicken. The Taiwanese version of shawarma, \"shāwēimǎ\" (Chinese: 沙威瑪), is nearly always chicken.\n\nOven roasted chicken is often served in the United States for special family meals including holidays such as Rosh Hashanah, Christmas and sometimes Easter or Thanksgiving. Considered a “comfort food” by many, oven roasted chicken had a resurgence of popularity in the mid to late 1990s as more restaurants and recipe publishers started to refocus on classic American fare. The basic roasting process involves removing the neck and giblets from the cavity, trussing the bird and folding the wings underneath, seasoning the skin and/or cavity, and then placing the bird in a pre-heated oven. The bird should be basted regularly, and is considered done when a meat thermometer registers 170℉ for white meat or 185℉ for dark meat. \n\n"}
{"id": "801834", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=801834", "title": "French dip", "text": "French dip\n\nA French dip sandwich, also known as a beef dip, is a hot sandwich consisting of thinly sliced roast beef (or, sometimes, other meats) on a \"French roll\" or baguette. It is usually served topped with Swiss Cheese, onions, and a side of beef juice from the cooking process (au jus, \"with juice\"). Beef broth or beef consommé is sometimes substituted. The sandwich is an American invention, with the name seeming to refer to the style of bread, rather than any French origin.\n\nAlthough the sandwich is most commonly served with a cup of \"jus\" or broth on the side of the plate, into which the sandwich is dipped as it is eaten, this is not how the sandwich was served when it was invented.\n\nTwo Los Angeles restaurants have claimed to be the birthplace of the French dip sandwich: Cole's Pacific Electric Buffet and Philippe the Original. Philippe's website describes the dish as a \"specialty of the house\", and the words \"Home of the Original French Dip Sandwich\" are present in the restaurant's logo. At Phillippe's, the roll is dipped in the hot beef juices before the sandwich is assembled, and is served \"wet\", while at Cole's it is served with a side of beef juices. The sandwich can also be requested \"double dipped\", where both halves of the sandwich are dipped before serving, at either establishment. Both restaurants feature their own brand of spicy mustard that is traditionally used by patrons to complement the sandwich.\n\nThis controversy over who originated the sandwich remains unresolved. Both restaurants were established in 1908. However, Cole's claims to have originated the sandwich shortly after the restaurant opened in 1908, while Philippe's claims that owner Philippe Mathieu invented it in 1918.\n\nThe story of the sandwich's invention by Philippe's has several variants: some sources say that it was first created by a cook or a server who, while preparing a sandwich for a police officer or fireman, accidentally dropped it into a pan of meat drippings. The patron liked it, and the dish surged in popularity shortly after its invention. Other accounts say that a customer who didn't want some meat drippings to go to waste requested his sandwich be dipped in them. Still others say that a chef dipped a sandwich into a pan of meat drippings after a customer complained that the bread was stale. Cole's account states that the sandwich was invented by a sympathetic chef, Jack Garlinghouse, for a customer who was complaining of sore gums. Some accounts tell Philippe's version of events, but assign the location to Cole's. The mystery of the sandwich's invention might not be solved due to a lack of information and observable evidence.\n\nThe French dip is now served at a number of restaurant chains including fast food places, diners, and standard restaurants.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "810727", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=810727", "title": "St. Ides", "text": "St. Ides\n\nSt. Ides is a malt liquor manufactured by the Pabst Brewing Company. The beverage contains 8.2% alcohol by volume, which is stronger than many high-alcohol malt liquors. It was launched by the McKenzie River Corporation in 1987. St. Ides gained prominence during the late 1980s and early 1990s through the use of celebrity endorsements by rap artists.\n\nThe beer is also available in a number of \"St. Ides Special Brews\" which have a variety of flavorings, including various fruit flavors. \n\nThe St. Ides brand has used celebrity endorsements by rappers and was unique in its early use of hip hop to build the brand's identity. DJ Pooh was brought in to design advertisements for the liquor and was given broad artistic license. In such contexts, the beer was often referred to as the \"Crooked \".\n\nChuck D took a stance against malt liquor advertising and sued the brand's then-owner, the McKenzie River Brewing Company, for using his voice without his permission. The controversy generated significant publicity for St. Ides and placed it on the average hip hop listener's radar.\n\nMcKenzie discontinued the brand in 1998 before it was purchased by Pabst Brewing Company.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "811199", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=811199", "title": "White bread", "text": "White bread\n\nWhite bread typically refers to breads made from wheat flour from which the bran and the germ layers have been removed (and set aside) from the whole wheatberry as part of the flour grinding or milling process, producing a light-colored flour. This milling process can give white flour a longer shelf life by removing the natural oils from the whole grain. Removing the oil allows products made with the flour, like white bread, to be stored for longer periods of time avoiding potential rancidity.\n\nThe flour used in white breads are bleached further—by the use of chemicals such as potassium bromate, azodicarbonamide, or chlorine dioxide gas to remove any slight, natural yellow shade and make its baking properties more predictable. This is banned in the EU. Some flour bleaching agents are also banned from use in other countries.\n\nIn the United States, consumers sometimes refer to white bread as sandwich bread and sandwich loaf.\n\nWhite bread contains 1/2 of the magnesium found in whole-wheat bread.\n\nWhile a bran and wheat germ discarding milling process can help improve white flour's shelf life, it does remove nutrients like some dietary fiber, iron, B vitamins, micronutrients and essential fatty acids. Since 1941, however, fortification of white flour-based foods with some of the nutrients lost in milling, like thiamin, riboflavin, niacin, and iron was mandated by the US government in response to the vast nutrient deficiencies seen in US military recruits at the start of World War II. This fortification led to nearly universal eradication of deficiency diseases in the US, such as pellagra and beriberi (deficiencies of niacin and thiamine, respectively) and white bread continues to contain these added vitamins to this day.\n\nFolic acid is another nutrient that some governments have mandated is added to enriched grains like white bread. In the US and Canada, these grains have been fortified with mandatory levels of folic acid since 1998 because of its important role in preventing birth defects. Since fortification began, the rate of neural tube defects has decreased by approximately one-third in the US.\n\n"}
{"id": "811905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=811905", "title": "Generally recognized as safe", "text": "Generally recognized as safe\n\nGenerally recognized as safe (GRAS) is a United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) designation that a chemical or substance added to food is considered safe by experts, and so is exempted from the usual Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (FFDCA) food additive tolerance requirements. The concept of food additives being \"generally recognized as safe\" was first described in the Food Additives Amendment of 1958, and all additives introduced after this time had to be evaluated by new standards.\n\nOn January 1, 1958, the FDA established the Food Additives Amendment of 1958, with a list of 700 food substances that were exempt from the then new requirement that manufacturers test food additives before putting them on the market. On August 31, 1960, William W. Goodrich, assistant general counsel of the FDA, addressed the annual meeting (16 Bus. Law. 107 -1960-1961) of the FFDCA. The purpose of the meeting was the forthcoming March 6, 1961, effective date of the enforcement provisions of the \"Food Additives Amendment of 1958\", referred to as GRAS.\n\nA GRAS determination can be self-affirmed or the FDA can be notified of a determination of GRAS by qualified non-governmental experts:\n\nFor substances used in food prior to January 1, 1958, a grandfather clause allows experience based on common use in food to be used in asserting they are safe under the conditions of their intended use.\n\nThe FDA can also explicitly withdraw the GRAS classification, as it did for trans fat in 2015.\n\nThe Code of Federal Regulations, Revised , includes (CFR) title 21 170.30(b) that provides general recognition of safety through scientific procedures requires the same quantity and quality of scientific evidence as is required to obtain approval of the substance as a food additive and ordinarily is based upon published studies, which may be corroborated by unpublished studies and other data and information.\n\nThe substance must be shown to be \"generally recognized\" as safe under the conditions of its intended use. The proponent of the exemption has the burden of providing rigorous scientific evidence that use of the substance in an edible consumer product is \"generally recognized\" as safe. To establish GRAS, the proponent – usually a food manufacturer, ingredient supplier, or manufacturer of dietary supplements – must show that there is a consensus of expert opinion that the substance is safe for its intended use.\n\nWhen a use of a substance does not qualify for the GRAS exemption, that use of the substance is subject to the premarket approval mandated by the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act. In such circumstances, the FDA can take enforcement action to stop distribution of the food substance and foods containing it on the grounds that such foods are or contain an unlawful food additive.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "813760", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=813760", "title": "Vernors", "text": "Vernors\n\nVernors is an American ginger ale brand. It was created in 1866 by James Vernor, a Detroit pharmacist.\n\nAlthough Vernors is the oldest surviving ginger ale sold in the United States, there were a number of brands of ginger ale, ginger soda, and ginger beer sold in commerce prior to 1866.\n\nVernor opened a drugstore of his own in Detroit, Michigan, on Woodward Avenue, on the southwest corner of Clifford Street and sold his ginger ale at its soda fountain. City by city, Vernor sold bottling franchises, with operators of those franchises required to adhere strictly to the recipe. In 1896, Vernor closed his drugstore and opened a soda fountain closer to the city center, on Woodward Avenue south of Jefferson Avenue, near the ferry docks on the Detroit River to concentrate on the ginger ale business alone. Initially, Vernors was only sold via soda fountain franchises. The early Vernors soda fountains featured ornate plaster, lighting and ironwork featuring a \"V\" design, examples of which still exist, such as at the Halo Burger restaurant in Flint, Michigan. Later, Vernors was bottled for home consumption.\n\nJames Vernor died October 29, 1927, and was succeeded by his son, James Vernor Jr. Expansion continued throughout Prohibition. Just prior to the onset of World War II, Vernors built a bottling plant and headquarters, encompassing an entire city block on Woodward Avenue, one block from the Detroit River. In the late 1950s, when the City of Detroit proposed construction of Cobo Hall and other riverfront projects, a land-swap was negotiated, and Vernors moved its bottling plant and headquarters to the location of the old civic exhibition hall at 4501 Woodward Avenue, incorporating many of the popular features of the old plant. Tours of the Vernors plant old and new were major tourist attractions. In 1962, Vernors introduced Vernors 1-Calorie, now called Diet Vernors.\n\nIn 1966, the Vernor family sold out to the first of a succession of owners. The company was next acquired by American Consumer Products and then by United Brands. The flagship Detroit bottling plant was shut down by United Brands in 1985, with the local rights to bottle Vernors granted to Pepsi-Cola. The Woodward Avenue plant was later demolished and replaced by a parking structure for Wayne State University. Vernors was purchased by A&W Beverages in 1987, which was in turn purchased by Cadbury Schweppes. Today, the Vernors brand is property of Keurig Dr Pepper of Burlington, VT, and Plano, TX, and the flagship bottling plant serving Michigan is the Keurig Dr Pepper bottling plant in Holland, Michigan.\n\nVernors may have been aged for four years in oak barrels when it was first concocted. However, whether that process continues to the present time is subject to speculation, at least, and the lack of confirmation from the Dr. Pepper company, and its change in packaging and labeling in 1996, calls that all into question.\n\nVernors is a sweet “golden” ginger ale that derives its color from caramel and has a robust flavor (similar to that of ginger beer). The Vernors style was common before Prohibition, when \"dry\" pale ginger ale (typified by Canada Dry Ginger Ale) became popular as a drink mixer.\n\nVernors is highly carbonated. Some people drink it hot as a remedy for stomach ache.\n\nLos Angeles Metropolitan News-Enterprise Editor Roger Grace describes the original flavor as \"mellow yet perky with the mellowness attributed to the aging in oak barrels, and the perkiness to the use of more ginger and sugar than \"dry\" ginger ales. Many people believe that the taste of Vernors has changed significantly in recent years. Grace describes the current flavor as an \"emaciated version of a product that once was\" and \"sweetened carbonated water with ginger flavoring\". Theories as to the reason for the claimed change in flavor include that the secret formula has been changed to use new products not originally available to Vernor, such as high fructose corn syrup; that it seems to have less carbonation than formerly; and that Vernors is no longer aged four years, but three in oak barrels.\n\nAccording to company legend, prior to the start of the American Civil War, while a clerk at the Higby & Sterns drugstore in Detroit, James Vernor experimented with flavors in an attempt to duplicate a popular ginger ale imported from Dublin, Ireland. When Vernor was called off to serve in the war, he stored the syrup base of 19 ingredients, including ginger, vanilla and other natural flavorings, in an oaken cask. Vernor joined the 4th Michigan Cavalry on August 14, 1862, as a hospital steward, and was promoted to second lieutenant on September 20, 1864. He was discharged on July 1, 1865. After returning from battle four years later, he opened the keg and found the drink inside had been changed by the aging process in the wood. It was like nothing else he had ever tasted, and he purportedly declared it \"Deliciously different,\" which remains the drink's motto to this day.\n\nIn a 1936 interview, however, James Vernor Jr., admitted that the formula was not developed by his father until after the war was over. This was confirmed in a 1962 interview with former company president, James Vernor Davis. According to the 1911 trademark application on \"Vernor's\" as a name for ginger ale and extract, Vernor's ginger ale first entered commerce in 1880, not 1866.\n\nFor most of its history, Vernors was a regional product. Initially Vernor sold franchises throughout Michigan and in major regional cities such as Toledo, Cleveland, and Buffalo. Vernors is also popular in Canada, having been sold at Ontario soda fountains from the 1920s onward, and with bottling facilities, soda fountains and outlets located in Southwestern Ontario.\n\nVernors was not mass distributed nationally until the 2000s, when the Dr. Pepper Snapple Group expanded the brand to a 33-state area. Even after expansion, Michigan accounts for 80% of Vernors sales. Michigan, Ohio, and Illinois are the highest-selling states, and primary cities are Detroit, Grand Rapids, Flint, Toledo, and Cincinnati. It is also very popular in Florida, which has large numbers of retired or relocated former Michigan residents.\n\nA number of slogans have been associated with Vernors over the years. Advertising in the early 1900s used the slogan \"Detroit's Drink\". According to its trademark application, it began using the slogan \"Deliciously Different\" in 1921. The labels formerly read \"Aged 4 years in wood\", which was changed some years ago to \"Flavor aged in oak barrels\", again in 1996 to \"Barrel Aged, Bold Taste\" and currently notes \"Barrel Aged 3 Years • Bold Taste\". The apostrophe in the name \"Vernor's\" was dropped in the late 1950s. For a time in the mid-1980s, Vernors used the slogan \"It's what we drink around here\" in its advertising campaigns. The gnome mascot, named \"Woody\", was used from the start of the 20th century until 1987, when it was dropped by A&W Brands in favor of new packaging, but had returned to the packaging by the 2000s. As recently as October 2013, Vernors features a picture of Woody with the slogan \"A Michigan Original Since 1866\", plus a picture of a barrel with the slogan \"Barrel Aged - Bold Taste\". As of January 2016, the wording surrounding the picture was changed to \"Authentic • Bold Taste\".\n\nThe identity of the Vernors gnome mascot has been contested and as a result, there is significant local folklore surrounding the gnome. While the Dr. Pepper company insists the name of the gnome has always been Woody, Lawrence L. Rouch, Vernors historian, argues this was not the case. He agrees that the gnome mascot surfaced sometime in the early 1900s and lasted through to the 1980s, but found no historical evidence of the name “Woody” being associated with the gnome.\n\nThere is general consensus, however, of Ronald Bialecki's live-action appearances as the gnome in the 1970s. According to both Vernors historians and Bialecki's family members, he was employed with the Doner Company at the time, which was the advertising firm in charge of the Vernors account. His arrival at work one morning was followed by widespread agreement amongst both Vernors representatives and Doner ad executives that he should be cast as the gnome. Bialecki was so dedicated to the role that he and his wife created a gnome costume for public appearances. During his time as the Vernors mascot, Bialecki made personal appearances in the \"gnome mobile\" which he also designed for the enjoyment of the local public.\n\nThe Detroit Historical Society and Museum teamed up with the Vernor's Collectors' Club and the Detroit Experience Factory to celebrate the brand. Starting June 7, 2016, a Vernors memorabilia exhibition showed artifacts and vintage signage from the brand. The feature ran through June 12, 2016, at the Detroit Historical Museum.\n\nThe main event was June 11, with Vernors-related programming all day at the museum, starting with a screening of “Detroit Remember When: Made in the Motor City,” a two-hour documentary about Buddy’s Pizza, American Coney Island and other local favorites.\n\nVernors can be used as an ingredient in cooking, and it is used by some Detroiters to add a sweet, spicy flavor to dishes. Soul singer Aretha Franklin became famous in the city for demonstrating a recipe, traditional at her church, for Christmas ham with a glaze made with the soft drink; Vernors has also been used in a glaze for salmon and in a batter for onion rings.\n\nA Boston Cooler, also known as a Vernor's float, is an ice cream soda variant typically composed of Vernors Ginger Ale and vanilla ice cream blended together similar to a milkshake, although in other parts of the country, different combinations of ingredients are also known as a Boston Cooler. Some native Detroiters simply put a scoop or two of vanilla ice cream in a glass, add Vernors and a soda straw, and call it a Boston Cooler. Some claim it is named Boston Cooler as it was invented on Boston Boulevard in Detroit. However, Boston Boulevard had not been developed yet when the drink was named.\n\nCafe D'Mongos Speakeasy, a bar in downtown Detroit, features a drink called The Detroit Brown, which combines Vernors ginger ale with Crown Royal and bitters. \n\n\n"}
{"id": "814147", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=814147", "title": "Centavo", "text": "Centavo\n\nThe centavo (Spanish and Portuguese 'one hundredth') is a fractional monetary unit that represents one hundredth of a basic monetary unit in many countries around the world. The term comes from Latin \"centum\", ('one hundred'), with the added suffix \"-avo\" ('portion').\n\nPlaces that currently use the centavo include: \n\nFormer forms of the centavo that are no longer in use include: \n\n"}
{"id": "816714", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=816714", "title": "Stable belt", "text": "Stable belt\n\nA stable belt is an item of uniform used in the armed forces of Denmark, the United Kingdom and other Commonwealth countries. Gymnastic belts are similar coloured belts used in Brazil and Lebanon.\n\nThe stable belt originates from when cavalrymen would place the surcingle around the waist when cleaning the stables and tending to their horses. In the 1950s they spread to all branches of the armed forces, adding a splash of colour and individuality to the drab khaki working uniforms. Initially they were resisted by many senior officers, who saw them as too individualistic, but they soon became accepted throughout the forces.\n\nGymnastic belts have a similar appearance but a different origin, being derived from physical training equipment.\n\nThe Australian Army adopted the stable belt in the late 1970s. They were removed from service in 1995, but were reintroduced in 2017.\n\nIn Brazil this belt is designated like gymnastic belt (). It is one of the most traditional items of the uniforms of the Military Firefighters Corps; which is used with few modifications, since 1887. At first it was rather reinforced, made of cotton and leather, to serve as climbing harness. Today it is mild and only serves as a ceremonial item.\n\nThere are only two models of belts:\nThe Danish Army, Home Guard, and Air Force all use stable belts. The Danish Defense's close cooperation with the British Army of the Rhine in the 1950s created the interest in a similar belt, for the Guard Hussar Regiment, which was introduced in 1968. In the late 70s, it was decided to allow Stable belts for all regiments in Denmark. The design of the belt would be based on the colours of the regiment, and a colour to signify their role. To show the transition between role and regiment colours, a thin line was introduced, there is however no system with these.\n\nThe Danish armed forces have had a total of 43 different stable belts, today there are only around sixteen in use. Only the standard black stable belt is issued, other belts have to be purchased individually, so are neither regulation nor compulsory.\nLebanese firefighters (الدفاع المدني, i.e. \"Civil Defense\") use the same type of gymnastic belt as used by firefighters in Brazil.\n\nThe various Corps and Regiments of the New Zealand Army wear stable belts.\n\nPersonnel of the Royal New Zealand Infantry Regiment, with the exception of those serving in Territorial Force battalion groups, wear the regimental belt of the Durham Light Infantry, being rifle green with two thin red stripes. The belt was adopted as the RNZIR Corps belt in 1970. The Durham Light Infantry regimental belt was given to the 1st Battalion, Royal New Zealand Infantry Regiment when it relieved the 1st Battalion, Durham Light Infantry at Sarawak, Borneo in May 1966.\n\nRifle green, derived from the light British Light Infantry\n\nTwo sets of thin Red and White stripes on a Black background, adopted in 1995. Originally the belt consisted of three even sized stripes of Red, Black and White and were based on the Regiment's colours.\n\nThe Otago and Southland Regimental belt is that of Queen’s Own Highlanders, and is the pattern of the McKenzie tartan.\n\nTwo separate belts are worn; officers and warrant officers wear a black belt with central stripes of red, green, yellow, mauve, and red, while soldiers below the rank of warrant officer wear a black belt with central stripes of yellow, red, green, and mauve. The belts adopted in 1973 were based on the Royal Hampshire Regiment with colours stemming from the regimental colours and the colours of the lace and facings on the uniforms of the 37th (North Hampshire) Regiment of Foot and 67th (South Hampshire) Regiment.\n\nThames blue with a gold strip in the middle, derived from the old Royal Warwickshire Regiment which in turn is derived from the old 6th Regiment of Foot. The 6th Foot were once charged with guarding the Crown Jewels in the Tower of London; hence the blue of the belt represents the Thames river and the Gold stripe, the Crown Jewels. The belt was introduced in 1975 and has a buckle in worn centre which has the Regiments badge mounted.\n\nThe 7th Wellington (City of Wellington’s Own) and Hawke’s Bay Battalion Group inherited the York and Lancaster Regiment stable belt. The belt is composed of maroon bands at the top and bottom (16mm wide), with a centre stripe of black (18mm wide) with a silver stripe above and gold stripe (each 6mm wide) below the centre strip. The York and Lancaster Regiment was allied to the Wellington Regiment in 1913 in recognistion of the York and Lancs (65th of Foot) 19 year participation in the New Zealand Wars.\n\nOriginates from belt worn by the British Special Air Service. It was first worn in 1965 by 1 Detachment, 1 Ranger Squadron NZSAS. The colours originate from a concept by David Stirling integrating the Oxford Blue and Cambridge Blue.\n\nThe QAMR belt is Black with a central Amber stripe as used by the original Queen Alexandra’s Mounted Rifles, they are also the colours of the Taranaki, where the unit’s foundations were laid in the early 1860s.\n\nThe Royal New Zealand Army Logistic Regiment Stable belt is Blue with a silver buckle displaying the Regiment Badge surrounded by the Regimental Motto \"Ma Nga Hua Tu-Tangata\" \"By our actions we are known\".\n\nA stable belt is a wide webbing belt, usually a single solid colour or horizontally striped in two or more different colours. It is worn around the waist and when worn with Combat Soldier 95 it is worn through the trouser belt loops. In the British Army or Royal Marines, when worn with barrack dress, the belt is placed either in the belt loops of trousers or a skirt or over a jersey. In the Royal Air Force, it is worn with service working dress (No. 2 dress) either covering the top of the trousers (or skirt) and the lower part of the shirt or through the belt loops if they have been specially designed to accommodate the belt's width. Unlike the Army, it is never worn over a jersey. The original cavalry stable belts buckled at the side to avoid chafing the soldier's stomach as he bent down during stable work and also to avoid marking or catching on the horse harness, but many stable belts are now clipped at the front, sometimes behind a metal belt plate (usually bearing the badge of the regiment), although a few regiments such as the Light Infantry clip their stable belts at the front with the original two leather straps. A large number of units, however, continue to use the traditional method of securing the belt using two leather straps and metal buckles at the left-hand side.\n\nToday, every regiment and corps of the British Army has its own stable belt, often very colourful. The Royal Navy, Royal Marines and Royal Air Force also have their own, until recently the Royal Navy rarely wore stable belts, unless working in a tri-service environment, they are now issued as a standard piece of uniform with the new Royal Navy Uniform RNPCS replacing the old No. 4s. Stable belts are worn with most styles of informal dress, but not with full dress, service dress or mess dress. Stable belts for Soldiers and Airmen are purchased by individual service personnel, not issued, so are theoretically neither regulation nor compulsory but since most people own one they are effectively uniform items in the Army or RAF.\n\nNote that these belts are shown in cross section, the stripes actually being horizontal as worn, and are actually considerably wider than shown, although the stripes are shown in correct proportion. Where belts are asymmetrical, the left-hand side of the illustration is the uppermost as worn.\n\nMany of these belts are still worn by sub-units.\n\nThese stable belts may still be worn by sub-units.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "817106", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=817106", "title": "Thums Up", "text": "Thums Up\n\n, Thums Up was the leader in the cola segment in India, commanding approximately 42% market share and an overall 15% market share in the Indian aerated waters market.\n\nThums Up was created in 1977, after the American company Coca-Cola withdrew from India, due to regulations requiring it to disclose its formula and sell 60% of its equity to an Indian company under a government plan for foreign-owned companies to share stakes with domestic partners. Brothers Ramesh and Prakash Chauhan joined up with Bhanu Vakil to introduce the soft drink. The Chauhan brothers owned part of the Parle company and already had two other brands of soda, Limca and Gold Spot, which were popular in India at the time. Thums Up quickly became the most popular and achieved a near monopoly among cola products in India during the 1980s, such as Campa Cola, Double Seven, Dukes and United Breweries Group's McDowell's Crush.\n\nRamesh had developed the formula from scratch, experimenting with ingredients such as cinnamon, cardamom, and nutmeg. The company also wanted the drink to be fizzy, even when it was not ice-cold, so it could be sold by vendors. After much testing and experimentation, the Chauhan brothers and their research team created a cola that was fizzier and spicier than Coca-Cola. They originally planned to name the drink “Thumbs Up,” but removed the “b” to make the name unique.\n\nIn 1991, when the Indian government opened the market to multinationals, Pepsi was the first to come in. Thums Up and Pepsi subsequently engaged in heavy competition for endorsements. Pepsi spokespersons included major Indian movie stars like Juhi Chawla, while Thums Up increased its spending on cricket sponsorship. Thums Up also introduced a larger bottle, branded \"MahaCola\" (meaning 'great [in size] cola'; the original size was ). This nickname gained popularity in smaller towns where people would ask for \"Maha Cola\" instead of Thums Up.\n\nIn 1993, Coca-Cola re-entered the market and the three companies competed intensely. Later in the year, Coca-Cola bought the Parle Company for $60 million. When Parle was sold to Coca-Cola, Thums Up had a market share of 85 percent in India.\n\nDespite its strong overall equity, the brand was losing its popularity among the core cola-drinking age group of 12- to 25-year-olds, partly due to a lack of advertising. At first, Coca-Cola cut advertising and production for Thums Up to drive customers to their flagship brand, but soon realised that Thums Up customers would turn to Pepsi instead of Coke, were Thums Up withdrawn from the market. Instead, Coke decided to use Thums Up as a rival brand to Pepsi. The Coca-Cola Company by this time had about 60.5% share of the Indian soft-drink market but found out that if it took out Thums Up, it would remain with only 28.7% of the market (according to a report by NGO Finance & Trade in India), hence Thums Up re-launched, targeting 30- to 40-year-olds.\n\nThe brand was re-positioned as a \"manly\" drink, drawing on its strong taste qualities.\nThums Up started an advertising campaign directly attacking Pepsi’s television commercials, focusing on the strength of the drink hoping that the depiction of an \"adult\" drink would appeal to young consumers. \"Grow up to Thums Up\" was a successful campaign. The brand's market share and equity increased.\n\nToday, the beverage is the leading cola in India, with 42 percent of the cola market share and 15 percent of the market share for all carbonated drinks. It is especially popular among teenagers, young adults, and people in their 30s and 40s. The soft drink was even ranked among India’s top trusted brands in the Brand Trust Report 2012, 2013, and 2014.\n\nAccording to Coca-Cola's Indian website, Thums Up contains: carbonated water, sugar, acidity regulator (E338), caffeine, natural colour (150d) and added flavours (\"natural, nature identical and artificial flavouring substances\").\n\nThe original Thums Up logo was a red thumbs up hand gesture with a slanted, white, sans-serif typeface. This would later be modified by Coca-Cola with blue strokes and a more modern-looking typeface.\n\nThe famous slogan until the early 1980s was \"Happy days are here again\", coined by copywriter, Vasant Kumar. The slogan later became \"I want My Thunder\", and subsequently \"Taste the thunder!\"\n\nProduct placement in films was used in the 1980s with Thums Up appearing in the background of many Hindi films.\n\nAdvertising campaigns from Thums Up build on its \"strength\" and its perception as a macho drink.\n\nIn February 2012, popular South Indian actor Mahesh Babu became a spokesperson for Thums Up.\nIn October 2012, Coca-Cola India signed Salman Khan once again as the brand ambassador of Thums Up. The company has also tied with Salman Khan's movie \"Dabangg 2\" and his charitable organisation as part of the deal.\n\nThums Up was a major sponsor of cricket matches and also had a notable presence at the Sharjah cricket matches. In the early 1980s, it came out with several postcards featuring Sunil Gavaskar and Imran Khan.\n\nBesides cricket, Parle’s southern bottler was a major sponsor of Indian motorsport in the 1980s. In addition to sponsoring several Indian track drivers in Sholavaram races, they sponsored several regional car and bike rallies. They were also associated for several seasons with the Lakshmi Mills Super Speeds team.\n\nPost 1990s, Thums Up's celebrity endorsers were Chiranjeevi, Mahesh Babu, Vishal from South India and Salman Khan and Akshay Kumar Ranveer Singh from Bollywood.\n\nAccording to the Brand Trust Report 2012 published by Trust Research Advisory, a brand analytics company, Thums Up was positioned 140th among India's most trusted brands. Subsequently, in Brand Trust Report 2013, Thums Up was ranked 170th among the most trusted brands in India while according to the Brand Trust Report 2014, Thums Up was elevated to the 66th position among India's most trusted brands.\n\nA peak in the Manmad Hills has become popularly known as the \"Thums Up Mountain\" or the \"\"Thums Up Pahaar\"\" (in Hindi), because it has a natural top like the \"Thums Up\" logo and is a popular sight from trains.\n\nThums Up appears in the book \"Eat, Pray, Love\" and its 2010 film adaptation.\n"}
{"id": "817886", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=817886", "title": "Blini", "text": "Blini\n\nA blini (sometimes spelled bliny) (Russian: блины pl., diminutive: блинчики, \"blinchiki\") (Ukrainian: млинці pl., diminutive: млинчики, mlynchiki) or, sometimes, blin (more accurate as a single form of the noun), is a Russian and Ukrainian pancake traditionally made from wheat or (more rarely) buckwheat flour and served with smetana, tvorog, butter, caviar and other garnishes. Its roots trace back to ancient Slavic rituals. They are also known as blintzes, crepes or palatschinke.\n\nSome English dictionaries record usage of the forms \"blin\" as singular and \"blini\" or \"bliny\" as plural, which correspond to the originally Russian forms, but other dictionaries consider this usage so rare in English that they do not mention \"blin\" at all and only record the widespread modern regular usage of \"blini\" for the singular and \"blinis\" for the plural. Some cookbooks and restaurants use \"blin\" and \"blintchick\" as in Russian to refer to crêpes.\n\nBlintzes are apparently an offshoot (an evolved or variant form) of blini. They are thin pancakes usually made of wheat flour (not buckwheat), folded to form a casing (as for cheese or fruit) and then sautéed or baked. Blini are among the most popular and most-eaten dishes in Russia.\n\nThe Old Slavic term for the Russian pancakes was probably \"mlinъ,\" which transformed in Old Russian into \"mlinŭ, blinŭ\",(млинъ/блинъ), (cf. \"mlynets’\" (млинець), Ukrainian for \"blin\"). While the Russian word \"bliný\" (plural of \"blin\") refers in modern Russian also to the introduced outlandish pancakes in general, meanwhile the term Ру́сские блины́ \"Rússkiye bliný\" (Russian pancakes) is often emphasized in Russia for differentiation.\n\nBlini are so deeply involved in Russian culture that the word \"blin (блин)\" is used as a linguistic signal in communications. It is used when a person talks to others and is searching for the right words, or to express his dissatisfaction.\n\nBlini were considered by early East Slavic people in pre-Christian times to be a symbol of the sun, due to their round form. They were traditionally prepared at the end of winter to honor the rebirth of the new sun (Butter Week, or Maslenitsa, also called \"butter week\" or \"pancake week\"). This tradition was adopted by the Orthodox church and is carried on to the present day. Drochena, a kind of blini, was also served at wakes to commemorate the recently deceased.\n\nTraditional Russian blini are made with yeasted batter, which is left to rise and then diluted with milk, soured milk, cold or boiling water. When diluted with boiling water, they are referred to as zavarniye bliny. A lighter and thinner form made from unyeasted batter (usually made of flour, eggs, milk or soured milk, kefir, ryazhenka, varenets), is also common in Russia. Traditionally, blini are baked in a Russian oven. The process of preparing blini is still referred to as baking in Russian, even though they are nowadays pan-fried, like pancakes. All kinds of flour may be used, from wheat and buckwheat to oatmeal and millet, although wheat is currently the most popular.\n\nBlini were popularized in the United States by Eastern European Jewish immigrants who used them in Jewish cuisine. While not part of any specific religious rite in Judaism, blini stuffed with a cheese filling and then fried in oil are served on holidays such as Chanukah (as oil played a pivotal role in the miracle of the Chanukah story) and Shavuot (when dairy dishes are traditionally served within the Ashkenazi \"minhag\"). Blini and blinchiki are ordinarily stuffed before being fried a second time, wrapped around stuffing and eaten without refrying, or simply folded and eaten with a dip. Fillings include chocolate, mushrooms, meat, rice, mashed potatoes and cheese.\n\nBlini or as they are known in (Ukrainian: mlyntsi) are a highly popular dish around the entirety of the country, the simplicity of making the thin pancakes as well as the basic ingredients yet highly favourable taste have led to the popularity of the dish. Mlyntsi have been eaten in Ukraine since pre-Christian times. Mlyntsi tend to be served in Ukraine with sour cream (Ukrainian: smetana) as well as with caviar, they can also be served as a sweet dish by serving them alongside a fruit preserve or a sweet cream. The thin pancakes can also be stuffed with cottage cheese, chopped boiled eggs, mixed green onions, stewed cabbage, minced meat, mashed beans, mushrooms, fruit and berries and raisins. However upon being stuffed the dish acquires a new title (Ukrainian: Налисники, \"nalysnyky\"), a fundamental dish of Ukrainian cuisine that is served all around the country with a number of regional varieties, for example the Chernihiv style nalysnyky are marked by their mushroom and cabbage filling. The most popular form of nalysnyky served in Ukraine is those stuffed with cottage cheese and served with sour cream. Nalysnyky as well as mlyntsi are also served for special occasions such as Masnytsya, a pagan Ukranian/Slavic festival that celebrates the end of winter and the arrival of spring, the pancakes play a prominent role in the festivities with the round yellow pancake most likely symbolising the sun. Nalysnyky can be formed out of mylntsi in a number of different shapes including; tubes, envelopes and even triangles. Some recipes call for the stuffed mlyntsi to be placed in an oven proof dish and cooked in an oven.\nSome ways that blini are prepared and served include the following:\n\nThey may be folded or rolled into a tube with sweet or salty fillings such as varenye, fruit, berry, mashed potatoes, quark, cooked ground meat, cooked chicken, salmon, chopped boiled eggs with green onions or chopped mushrooms.\n\n\nBlini are considered to be the traditional meal in Lithuanian culture on Shrove Tuesday.\n\n"}
{"id": "822030", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=822030", "title": "Ajam", "text": "Ajam\n\nAjam () is an Arabic word that refers to someone whose mother tongue is not Arabic. During the Arab conquest of Persia, the term became a racial pejorative. Colloquially, it now refers to non-Arabs in general.\n\nAccording to traditional etymology, the word \"ʿajam\" comes from the Semitic root \"aʿ-j-m\". Related forms of the same root include, but are not limited to:\n\n\nHomophonous words, which may or may not be derived from the same root, include:\n\nModern use of \"ajam\" has the meaning of \"non-Arab\".\n\nThe verb \"ʿajama\" originally meant \"to mumble, and speak indistinctly\", which is the opposite of \"ʿaraba\", “to speak clearly”. Accordingly, the noun \"ʿujma\", of the same root, is the opposite of \"fuṣḥa\", which means \"chaste, correct, Arabic language\". In general, during the Umayyad period \"ajam\" was a pejorative term used by Arabs conscious of their social and political superiority, in early history after Islam. However, the distinction between Arab and Ajam is discernible in pre-Islamic poetry.\n\nDuring the Umayyad period, the term developed a derogatory meaning as the word was used to refer to non-Arab speakers (primarily Persians) as illiterate and uneducated. Arab conquerors in that period tried to impose Arabic as the primary language of the subject peoples throughout their empire. Angry with the prevalence of the Persian language in the Divan and Persian society, al-Hajjaj ibn Yusuf ordered the official language of the conquered lands to be replaced with Arabic, sometimes by force (including cutting out the tongues of Persian speakers, further popularising the term \"mute\"). Persian resistance to this mentality was popularised in the final verse of Ferdowsi's \"Shahnameh\"; this verse is widely regarded by Iranians as the primary reason that they speak Persian and not Arabic to this day. Under the Umayyad dynasty, official association with the Arab dominion was only given to those with the ethnic identity of the Arab and required formal association with an Arab tribe and the adoption of the client status (mawālī, another derogatory term translated to mean \"slave\" or \"lesser\" in this context).\n\nAccording to Clifford Edmund Bosworth, \"by the 3rd/9th century, the non-Arabs, and above all the Persians, were asserting their social and cultural equality (\"taswīa\") with the Arabs, if not their superiority (\"tafżīl\") over them (a process seen in the literary movement of the Šoʿūbīya). In any case, there was always in some minds a current of admiration for the ʿAǰam as heirs of an ancient, cultured tradition of life. Even the great proponent of the Arab cause, Jāḥeẓ, wrote a \"Ketāb al-taswīa bayn al-ʿArab wa’l-ʿAǰam\". After these controversies had died down, and the Persians had achieved a position of power in the Islamic world comparable to their numbers and capabilities, \"ʿAjam\" became a simple ethnic and geographical designation.\". Thus by the ninth century, the term was being used by Persians themselves as an ethnic term, and examples can be given by Asadi Tusi in his poem comparing the superiority of Persians and Arabs.\nAccordingly: \"territorial notions of “Iran,” are reflected in such terms as irānšahr, irānzamin, or Faris, the Arabicized form of Pārs/Fārs (Persia). The ethnic notion of “Iranian” is denoted by the Persian words Pārsi or Irāni, and the Arabic term Ahl Faris (inhabitants of Persia) or ʿAjam, referring to non-Arabs, but primarily to Persians as in molk-e ʿAjam (Persian kingdom) or moluk-e ʿAjam (Persian kings).\".\n\nAccording to \"The Political Language of Islam\", during the Islamic Golden Age, 'Ajam' was used colloquially as a reference to denote those whom Arabs in the Arabian Peninsula viewed as \"alien\" or outsiders. The early application of the term included all of the \"non-Arab \"peoples with whom the Arabs had contact including Persians, Byzantine Greeks, Ethiopians, Armenians, Assyrians, Mandaeans, Arameans, Jews, Georgians, Sabians, Samaritans, Egyptians, Berbers and the related Nabataeans (despite being the originators of the first Arab identifying people).\n\nDuring the early age of the Caliphates, Ajam was often synonymous with \"foreigner\" or \"stranger\". In the Western Asia, it was generally applied to the Persians, while in al-Andalus it referred to speakers of Romance languages - becoming \"Aljamiado\" in Spanish in reference to Arabic-script writing of those languages - and in West Africa refers to the Ajami script or the writing of local languages such as Hausa and Fulani in the Arabic alphabet. In Zanzibar \"ajami\" and \"ajamo\" means Persian which came from the Persian Gulf and the cities of Shiraz and Siraf. In Turkish, there are many documents and letters that used Ajam to refer to Persian. \n\nIn the Persian Gulf region today, people still refer to Persians as Ajami, referring to Persian carpets as \"sajjad al Ajami\" (Ajami carpet), Persian cat as Ajami cats, and Persian Kings as Ajami kings.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "822164", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=822164", "title": "Personal advertisement", "text": "Personal advertisement\n\nA personal or personal ad is an item or notice traditionally in the newspaper, similar to a classified advertisement but personal in nature. In British English it is also commonly known as an advert in a lonely hearts column. With its rise in popularity, the World Wide Web has also become a common medium for personals, commonly referred to as online dating. Personals are generally meant to generate romance, friendship, or casual (sometimes sexual) encounters, and usually include a basic description of the person posting it, and their interests.\n\nNewspapers and magazines that take personal advertisements often provide a reply forwarding service; in this case, the text of the advert will include a unique box number and anyone wishing to reply to the advert sends or delivers their reply to the publisher's address in an envelope bearing that number. The publisher forwards replies in bulk to the advertiser at a given interval, for example each week. \n\nAnother method of replying to Lonely Hearts adverts is via telephone; this took off with the introduction of premium-rate telephone numbers, providing an additional way for the publisher to generate money. The usual business model is for the advertiser to be enticed to place an advert free of charge (using an 0800 number or equivalent); those replying (and also the advertiser, when they want to check for any replies) must use a premium-rate line.\n\nDue to newspaper prices being based on characters or lines of text, a jargon of abbreviations, acronyms and code words arose in personals and have often carried over to the internet.\n\nThe following are examples of single-letter abbreviations used in three-letter acronyms (TLAs).\n\nThe first letter often describes the relationship state or sexuality of the person:\n\n\nThe middle letter generally represents the ethnicity or nationality of the person posting the ad. Can be replaced by 4, standing for the word for (\"seeking\", \"desires\", etc.).\n\n\nThe third letter commonly describes the gender of the person (or couple, if that is what is seeking or sought).\n\n\nAs well as three-letter abbreviations of the format described above, a number of other acronyms and abbreviated words have been popular in personal adverts at different times and in different places. This list is far from complete:\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "823489", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=823489", "title": "Jim Beam", "text": "Jim Beam\n\nJim Beam is a brand of bourbon whiskey produced in Clermont, Kentucky, by Beam Suntory, a subsidiary of Suntory Holdings of Osaka, Japan. It is one of the best-selling brands of bourbon in the world. Since 1795 (interrupted by Prohibition), seven generations of the Beam family have been involved in whiskey production for the company that produces the brand, which was given the name \"Jim Beam\" in 1933 in honor of James B. Beam, who rebuilt the business after Prohibition ended. Previously produced by the Beam family and later owned by the Fortune Brands holding company, the brand was purchased by Suntory Holdings in 2014.\n\nDuring the late 18th century, members of the Böhm family, who eventually changed the spelling of their surname to \"Beam\", emigrated from Germany and settled in Kentucky.\n\nJohannes \"Reginald\" Beam (1760–1834) was a farmer who began producing whiskey in the style that became known as bourbon. Jacob Beam sold his first barrels of corn whiskey around 1795. The whiskey was first called Old Jake Beam Sour Mash, and the distillery was known as Old Tub.\n\nDavid Beam (1802–1854) took on his father's responsibilities in 1820 at the age of 18, expanding distribution of the family's bourbon during a time of industrial revolution. David M. Beam (1833–1913) in 1854 moved the distillery to Nelson County to capitalize on the growing network of railroad lines connecting states. James Beauregard Beam (1864–1947) managed the family business before and after Prohibition, rebuilding the distillery in 1933 in Clermont, Kentucky, near his Bardstown home. The James B. Beam Distilling Company was founded in 1935 by Harry L. Homel, Oliver Jacobson, Harry Blum, and Jeremiah Beam. From this point forward, the bourbon would be called \"Jim Beam Bourbon\" after James Beauregard Beam, and some of the bottle labels bear the statement, \"None Genuine Without My Signature\" with the signature James B. Beam. In 1945, the company was purchased by Harry Blum, a Chicago spirits merchant. The Beam company was purchased by American Brands in 1968.\n\nT. Jeremiah Beam (1899–1977) started working at the Clear Springs distillery in 1913, later becoming the master distiller and overseeing operations at the new Clermont facility. Jeremiah Beam eventually gained full ownership and opened a second distillery near Boston, Kentucky, in 1954. Jeremiah later teamed up with childhood friend Jimberlain Joseph Quinn, to expand the enterprise.\n\nBooker Noe (1929–2004), birth name Frederick Booker Noe II, grandson of Jim Beam, was the Master Distiller at the Jim Beam Distillery for more than 40 years, working closely with Master Distiller Jerry Dalton (1998–2007). In 1987 Booker introduced his own namesake bourbon, Booker's, the company's first uncut, straight-from-the-barrel bourbon, and the first of the company's \"Small Batch Bourbon Collection\".\n\nFred Noe (1957–present), birth name Frederick Booker Noe III, became the seventh generation Beam family distiller in 2007 and regularly travels for promotional purposes.\n\nThe Beam family has also played a major role in the history of the Heaven Hill Distillery. All of the Master Distillers at Heaven Hill since its founding have been members of the Beam family. The original Master Distiller at Heaven Hill was Joseph L. Beam, Jim Beam's first cousin. He was followed by his son, Harry, who was followed by Earl Beam, the son of Jim Beam's brother, Park. Earl Beam was then succeeded by the current Heaven Hill Master Distillers, Parker Beam and his son, Craig Beam.\n\nIn 1987, Jim Beam purchased National Brands, acquiring brands including Old Crow, Bourbon de Luxe, Old Taylor, Old Grand-Dad, and Sunny Brook. Old Taylor was subsequently sold to the Sazerac Company.\n\nOn August 4, 2003, a fire destroyed a Jim Beam aging warehouse in Bardstown, Kentucky. It held about 19,000 barrels of bourbon. Flames rose more than 100 feet from the burning structure. Burning bourbon spilled from the warehouse and set a nearby creek on fire. An estimated 19,000 fish died of the bourbon in the creek and a river.\n\nFor some period of time, Jim Beam was part of the holding company formerly known as Fortune Brands that was dismantled in 2011. Other parts of the remaining company were spun off as an IPO on the NYSE on the same day, as Fortune Brands Home & Security, and the liquor division of the holding company was renamed Beam, Inc. on October 4, 2011. In January 2014, it was announced that Beam Inc. would be purchased by Suntory Holdings Ltd., a Japanese group of brewers & distillers known for producing Japan's first whiskey. The combined company is known as Beam Suntory.\n\nIn the history of the brand now known as Jim Beam, there have been seven generations of distillers from the Beam (and Noe) family. Retired Master Distiller Jerry Dalton (1998–2007) was the first non-Beam to be Master Distiller at the company, and his successor was a member of the family.\n\nSeveral varieties bearing the Jim Beam name are available.\n\n\n\n\nAll are 70 proof (35% ABV)\n\nSeveral of these offerings have performed quite well at international spirits ratings competitions. For example, Jim Beam's Black label was awarded a gold medal at the 2012 San Francisco World Spirits Competition. Jim Beam Black also won a Gold Outstanding medal at the 2013 International Wine and Spirit Competition.\n\nThe Beam \"Small Batch Bourbon Collection\" consists of several bourbons where the Beam name appears on the labels and marketing materials but is less prominent.\n\nBourbon whiskey distillers must follow government standards for production. By law (), any \"straight\" bourbon must be: produced in the United States; made of a grain mix of at least 51% corn; distilled at no higher than 160 proof (80% ABV); free of any additives (except water to reduce proof for aging and bottling); aged in new, charred white oak barrels; entered into the aging barrels at no higher than 125 proof (62.5% ABV), aged for a minimum of 2 years, and bottled at no less than 80 proof (40% ABV).\n\nJim Beam starts with water filtered naturally by the limestone shelf found in Central Kentucky. A strain of yeast used since the end of Prohibition is added to a tank with the grains to create what is known as \"dona yeast\", used later in the fermentation process. Hammer mills grind the mix of corn, rye and barley malt to break it down for easier cooking. The mix is then moved into a large mash cooker where water and set back are added. The \"set back\" is a portion of the old mash from the previous distillation—the key step of the sour mash process, ensuring consistency from batch to batch.\n\nFrom the cooker, the mash heads to the fermenter where it is cooled to 60–70 °F and yeast is added again. The yeast is fed by the sugars in the mash, producing heat, carbon dioxide and alcohol. Called \"distiller's beer\" or \"wash\", the resulting liquid (after filtering to remove solids) looks, smells and tastes like (and essentially is) a form of beer. The wash is pumped into a column still where it is heated to over 200 °F, causing the alcohol to turn to a vapor. As the vapor cools and falls it turns to a liquid called \"low wine\", which measures 125 proof or 62.5% alcohol. A second distillation in a pot still heats and condenses the liquid into \"high wine\", which reaches 135 proof (67.5% alcohol).\n\nThe high wine is moved to new, charred American oak barrels, each of which hold about 53 gallons of liquid. A \"bung\" is used to seal the barrels before moving them to nearby hilltop rackhouses where they will age up to nine years. As the seasons change, natural weather variations expand and contract the barrel wood, allowing bourbon to seep into the barrel, and the caramelized sugars from the charred oak flavor and color the bourbon. A significant portion (known as the \"angel's share\") of the 53 gallons of bourbon escapes the barrel through evaporation, or stays trapped in the wood of the barrel. Jim Beam ages for at least four years, or twice as long as the government requires for a \"straight\" bourbon. At the end of the aging period the amber liquid is filtered, bottled, packaged and sent to one of many distributors around the world using the three-tier distribution system.\n\nOn July 26, 2004, THANASI Foods announced the release of Jim Beam Soaked Sunflower Seeds, a snack product soaked in Jim Beam and available in 3 flavors; Original, Barbeque, and Jalapeño. On October 18, 2004, the company announced the addition of Jim Beam Soaked Beef Jerky to the range. Jim Beam has a licensing agreement with Vita Food Products to manufacture and sell Jim Beam BBQ Sauces, Marinades, Mustards, Steak Sauces, Hot Sauce, Wing Sauce, Pancake Syrup and Glazes. Vita Specialty Foods also produces a range of Jim Beam hot smoked and fresh, marinated salmon. Top Shelf Gourmet specializes in Jim Beam bourbon-infused fresh pork and poultry products, including Jim Beam Bourbon Barrel Ham, Pulled Pork, and Pulled Chicken.\n\nBrandmark Products produces a full range of Jim Beam branded billiard and home recreation products. Zippo produces a range of Jim Beam branded pocket and multi-purpose lighters. Bradley Smoker produces a line of Jim Beam branded smokers and smoking briquettes made from Jim Beam Barrels. Silver Buffalo designs Jim Beam wall art, dartboards and accessories for home recreational use. Concept One develops Jim Beam headwear. Headline Entertainment develops Jim Beam T-shirts and outerwear. Sherwood Brands produces a full line of Jim Beam gift sets.\n\nOutside the United States, Beam Global Spirits & Wine has had a sales and distribution alliance with The Edrington Group since 2009.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "824008", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=824008", "title": "Dunkel", "text": "Dunkel\n\nDunkel, or Dunkles, is a word used for several types of dark German lager. \"Dunkel\" is the German word meaning \"dark\", and dunkel beers typically range in color from amber to dark reddish brown. They are characterized by their smooth malty flavor. In informal terms, such as when ordering at a bar, \"dunkel\" is likely to mean whatever dark beer the bar has on tap, or sells most of; in much of north and western Germany, especially near Düsseldorf, this may be altbier.\n\nIn Bavaria, Dunkel, along with helles, is a traditional style brewed in Munich and popular throughout Bavaria. With alcohol concentrations of 4.5% to 6% by volume, dunkels are weaker than Doppelbocks, another traditional dark Bavarian beer. Dunkels are produced using Munich malts which give the Dunkel its color. Other malts or flavors may also be added.\n\nMany dunkels have a distinctive malty flavor that comes from a special brewing technique called decoction mashing. Most commonly, dunkel beers are dark lagers, but the term is also used to refer to dark wheat beers such as Franziskaner Hefe-Weisse Dunkel. Dunkel weizen is another term used to refer to dark wheat beers, which are fruity and sweet with more dark, roasted malts than their lighter counterpart, the hefeweizen.\n\nDunkels were the original style of the Bavarian villages and countryside, and it was the most common style at the time of the introduction of the Reinheitsgebot (1516). As such, it is the first \"fully codified and regulated\" beer. Its ABV is rarely higher than 5.5%, and it has low bitterness, a distinctive dark color, and a malty flavor. Dunkel is brewed using lager yeasts.\n\nLighter-colored lagers were not common until the later part of the 19th century when technological advances made them easier to produce.\n\nDunkel is also widespread in parts of Franconia, for example the Franconian Switzerland, where it has been originally the most common beer type. The region has a lot of microbreweries, of which many still produce Dunkel. One Example is Weissenohe Abbey Brewery (\"Weissenoher Klosterbrauerei\").\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "824148", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=824148", "title": "Veggie burger", "text": "Veggie burger\n\nA veggie burger is a burger patty that does not contain meat or any such kind of meat. Such burgers may be made from ingredients like beans, especially soybeans and tofu, nuts, grains, seeds or fungi such as mushrooms or mycoprotein.\nThe patties that are the essence of a veggie burger have existed in various Eurasian cuisines for millennia, including in the form of disc-shaped grilled or fried meatballs or as koftas, a commonplace item in Indian cuisine. These may contain meats or be made of entirely vegetarian ingredients such as legumes or other plant-derived proteins. While it is not possible, or even necessary, to identify the 'inventor' of the veggie burger, there have been numerous claimants.\n\nThe veggie burger, by name, may have been created in London in 1982 by Gregory Sams, who called it the 'VegeBurger'. Gregory and his brother Craig had run a natural food restaurant in Paddington since the 1960s; a Carrefour hypermarket in Southampton sold 2000 packets in three weeks after its launch.\n\nUsing the name Gardenburger, an early veggie burger was developed by Paul Wenner around 1980 or 1981 in Wenner's vegetarian restaurant, The Gardenhouse, in Gresham, Oregon.\n\nSome fast food companies have been offering vegetarian foods increasingly since the beginning of the 21st century.\n\nIn India where vegetarianism is widespread, McDonald's, Burger King, Wendy's and KFC serve veggie burgers. In 2012, McDonald's opened its first vegetarian-only restaurant in India.\n\nDifferent kinds of veggie burgers are also served permanently in McDonald's restaurants in:\n\nIn the United States as of April 2005, veggie burgers became available in Burger King restaurants and those of its franchise Hungry Jack's. As of that same time, they were also available in certain Subways and Harvey's, as well as many chain restaurants, such as Red Robin, Chili's, Denny's, Friendly's, Culvers, Johnny Rockets, and Hard Rock Cafe. Occasionally the veggie burger option will appear at the bottom of a menu as a possible substitution for beef or turkey burgers, rather than as an individual menu item.\n\nManufacturing often follows certain steps.\n\nThe grains and vegetables used in the patties are first washed and thoroughly cleaned to help ensure the removal of dirt, bacteria, chemical residues, and other materials that may be on the raw products. This process can either be done by hand or through the use of machinery such as high-pressure sprayers. With the use of a conveyor belt, the food is moved along under a high-pressure sprayer to remove the debris listed above. Another method that may be used by companies is the use of a hollow drum which circulates the food while water is sprayed onto it to remove the debris.\n\nNext, a steam-heated mixer is used to cook the grain and remove any extra debris and excess water. The mixer typically has oils within it (such as safflower oil). As the oil simmers, the grains are gradually added in and the blades are used to mix the grains around. The steam created in the mixer allows the grains to cook resulting in a puree.\n\nNext the vegetables are cut up into smaller pieces to allow more surface area for cooking purposes. This can be done by hand or through the use of machines in factories.\n\nThe vegetables are then added to the grain mixture in the steam-heated mixture. The exact ratio of grains to vegetables is unique to each company, resulting in different textures and tastes that are produced.\n\nAs the vegetables are being cooked in the mixer, their natural sugars release, resulting in caramelization. The sweet flavors thus created from this caramelization are mixed uniformly in the mixer. The technique used for the creation of this caramelization mixture is called mirepoix. This technique is very important to the production of veggie burgers, as it adds both texture and flavor to the patty.\n\nThe mirepoix mixture is then placed into another mixing tub, where dry ingredients such as oats, walnuts, potato flakes, and more are added. The mixture is then folded together to make a uniform mix. The moisture from the vegetables causes the mixture to become sticky, thus clumping together like cookie dough. This is important, as it allows the veggie burger to stick together to form the patty.\n\nThe mixture is now put into an automatic patty-making machine or press. The press then punches out the patties into a disc shape onto a conveyor belt underneath. A constant spray of water may also be used to prevent any of the mixture from sticking to machinery parts. Once on the conveyor tray, the patties move along to be put onto baking trays.\n\nPatties are first inspected to make sure they are the correct shape, size, and texture to ensure a high-quality product. The trays are then put into a heated convection oven at a designated temperature and time.\n\nOnce out of the oven, the patties are quickly frozen with techniques such as individual quick freezing and cryogenic freezing. These quick-freezing methods freeze the patties within 30 minutes to lock in nutrients and preserve texture by the formation of a number of small ice crystals.\n\nThe frozen patties are again placed on a conveyor belt that takes them to a vacuum-packaging machine. The machine seals the patties into measured plastic sleeves and draws out any excess air. The packages are then loaded into printed cardboard boxes with the aid of another machine or done manually. The flaps on the box are then sealed closed and the product is kept in temperature-controlled storage before, during, and after delivery to grocery stores.\n\nGrains are primarily used in the manufacturing of veggie burgers to act as a meat substitute. The grains, such as rice and wheat, provide carbohydrates and protein components and to provide bulk to the patty. They also provide texture to the burger, which can change depending on the type of grain used. This texture and look is important as they wish to make the patty look like a beef patty.\n\nVegetables such as corn, carrots, and mushrooms, provide the patty with texture and taste. Additionally, they provide moisture when heated. This allows the disc shape without breaking apart easily. The vegetables also provide nutrients with the addition of some vitamins and minerals.\n\nAdding dry ingredients, such as oats, flours, nuts, or breadcrumbs, can absorb excess moisture and liquid, which results in the patty sticking together tightly. This could turn the moist veggie patties into a sticky consistency, which also helps the patties shape easily. Dry ingredients provide proteins and fiber, which add nutritional value to the veggie patty. Dry ingredients, such as walnuts and almonds, are also rich in energy, vitamins and minerals.\n\nTapioca starch and vegetable gum are two common ingredients used as stabilizers in veggie burger. Tapioca starch is often used as a thickening agent for manufactured foods due to its cheaper price. It gets sticky once it is wet, which helps to hold the burger patty tightly together. This prevents the patty from breaking apart. Vegetable gum provides negligible nutrients, but it also helps to hold everything together in the patty.\n\nOils, such as safflower, coconut, and olive oil, can lubricate the grain mix, and allow further cooking processing when the wheat is added. It facilitates the Maillard reaction and makes the veggie patty taste better by bringing out the flavors. Oils can also prevent the ingredients from sticking to the mixing machine, thus allowing them to be mixed well and heated together.\n\nSalt is typically used for flavor, but may be used as a preservative in veggie burgers. With the use of salt, the water activity of the food is reduced. This helps prevent the growth of micro-organisms and prolongs the shelf life of the food.\n\n"}
{"id": "825613", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=825613", "title": "Steak tartare", "text": "Steak tartare\n\nSteak tartare is a meat dish made from raw ground meat (beef or horsemeat). It is usually served with onions, capers, pepper and Worcestershire sauce, and other seasonings, often presented to the diner separately, to be added to taste. It is often served with a raw egg yolk, and often on rye bread.\n\nThe name tartare is sometimes generalized to other raw meat or fish dishes.\n\nA less-common version in France is \"tartare aller-retour\", a mound of mostly raw ground meat that is lightly seared on both sides.\n\nThe idea of eating minced and/or raw meat was popularized in Slavic regions, associated with Mongol encroachment. They and their turkic allies the Tatars were known collectively as being from Tartary, which was essentially Mongolia, though the name was a conflation of Tatar with the Greek stories of Tartarus. They had a tradition of finely mincing very tough meats like horse and camel, to make them edible, then binding the meat with milk or eggs. Europeans told stories of this being made by placing the meat under a saddle to ride upon it until tender. It is possible that this story was confusion originating in the use of thin slices of meat to protect saddle sores from further rubbing. Either way, minced and/or raw beef became associated with Tartary. \n\nThus was minced raw meat introduced to Moscow by the Golden Horde. Russian ships brought recipes for steak tartare to the port of Hamburg during the 17th century, a time when there was such a great presence of Russian residents there that it was nicknamed \"the Russian port.\" Trade within the Hanseatic League between the 13th and 17th centuries made this port one of the largest in Europe, its commercial importance being further heightened as it became vital to early transatlantic voyages during the age of steam. In the period of European colonization of the Americas, immigrants to this port were a \"bridge\" between old European recipes and the future development of raw minced beef in the United States. \n\nDuring the first half of the 19th century, most of the northern European emigrants who traveled to the New World embarked on their transatlantic voyages from Hamburg. The German shipping company Hamburg America Line, also known as the \"Hamburg Amerikanische Packetfahrt Actien-Gesellschaft\" (HAPAG), was involved in Atlantic transport for almost a century. The company began operations in 1847 and employed many German immigrants, many of them fleeing the revolutions of 1848–9. The vast majority of settlers and emigrants from various parts of northern Europe also began voyages to the United States from Hamburg, introducing the culinary customs to state they come into. New York City was the most common destination for ships traveling from Hamburg, and various restaurants in the city began offering the Hamburg-style steak in order to attract German sailors. The steak frequently appeared on the menu as a \"Hamburg-style American fillet\", or even \"beefsteak à Hambourgeoise\". Early American preparations of minced beef were therefore made to fit the tastes of European immigrants, evoking memories of the port of Hamburg and the world they left behind.\n\nIn the late 19th century, the Hamburg steak became popular on the menus of many restaurants in the port of New York. This kind of fillet was beef minced by hand, lightly salted and often smoked, and usually served raw in a dish along with onions and bread crumbs. Hamburg steak was gaining popularity because of its ease of preparation decreasing cost. This is evident from its detailed description in some of the most popular cookbooks of the day. Documents show that this preparation style was used by 1887 in some U.S. restaurants and was also used for feeding patients in hospitals; the Hamburg steak was served raw or lightly cooked and was accompanied by a raw egg.\n\nIt is not known when the first restaurant recipe for steak tartare appeared. While not providing a clear name, the first description of steak tartare was given by Jules Verne in 1875 in his novel \"Michael Strogoff\". \n\nThe first reference (to \"tartar steak\") in fact seems to come from America in 1889. \nIn the early twentieth century what is now generally known as \"steak tartare\" was in Europe called \"steack à l'Americaine\". Steak tartare was a variation on that dish; the 1921 edition of Escoffier's \"Le Guide Culinaire\" defines it as \"steack à l'Americaine\" made without egg yolk, served with tartar sauce on the side.\n\nThe current name is a shortening of the French original \"\"à la tartare\"\", literally meaning \"served with tartar sauce\", a dish popular in the 19th and early 20th centuries.\n\nOver time, the distinction between \"steack à l'Americaine\" and its variant disappeared. The 1938 edition of \"Larousse Gastronomique\" describes steak tartare as raw ground beef served with a raw egg yolk, without any mention of tartar sauce.\n\nFormerly, it was called \"Tartar steak\".\n\n\"À la tartare\" or simply \"tartare\" still means \"served with tartar sauce\" for some dishes, mostly fried fish. The name \"tartare\" is now sometimes applied to other meats or fish, such as tuna tartare, introduced in 1975 by the restaurant Le Duc in Paris.\n\nHealth concerns have reduced the popularity of this meat dish in some parts of the world because of the danger of contamination by bacteria and parasites such as \"Toxoplasma gondii\" and \"Taenia saginata\".\n\nWhen basic hygienic rules are followed and fresh meat is used, the risk of bacterial infection is low. Even when these provisions are met, it is nonetheless not recommended for people who have a weakened immune system or a chronic illness, as these individuals are at a greater risk of infection from \"E. coli\" and/or \"Salmonella\".\n\n\"Toxoplasma gondii\" is a parasite that may be found in raw or undercooked meat. A multicentre case-control study found inadequately cooked or cured meat as the main risk factor for toxoplasma infection in all centres. Due to the risk of congenital toxoplasmosis in the fetus, pregnant women are advised not to eat raw meat. Latent toxoplasmosis in adults, though not as harmful as congenital toxoplasmosis, has been associated with psychological effects and lower IQ in some studies.\n\n\"Taenia saginata\" (beef tapeworm) may also be acquired via ingestion of under-cooked beef. The tapeworm is transmitted to humans via infectious larval cysts that are found in cattle.\n\nSteak tartare is found in many European cuisines.\n\nThe Belgian version, \"filet américain (préparé)\", is generally made with mayonnaise and seasoned with capers and fresh herbs. It was formerly made of horse meat. It is usually served with chips/ french fries.\n\nIn the Czech republic and Slovakia steak tartare (\"tatarský biftek\") is found in most restaurants. The meat is ground lean sirloin and has a raw egg yolk in a dimple in the middle. The meat can be premixed with herbs and spices, but usually the customer is given spices and condiments to add to taste. Steak tartare is typically served with fried bread (topinka) and raw garlic cloves for rubbing on the toast.\n\nA variant of steak tartare is also present in Danish smørrebrød, where it is served on rugbrød (rye bread) with assorted toppings.\nIn Sweden, steak tartare, \"råbiff\", is usually served with raw egg yolk, raw onions, diced pickled beetroot and capers. In Finland, \"tartarpihvi\" is served with raw egg yolk, raw onions, pickled and salted cucumbers and capers. Variations of the dish include dressing with buttermilk sauce and salmon roe. The (European) Russian version can include pickled and salted mushrooms and toasted white bread.\n\nIn Wisconsin, it is quite popular among the descendants of German immigrants, using raw ground sirloin, rye bread as in Germany, salt, pepper and chopped raw onions. It is popularly known as the \"cannibal sandwich\" among many Wisconsin residents.\n\nChilean cuisine features a dish of prepared raw beef called crudos.\n\nIn southern Brazil, influenced by German immigrants, it is known as Hackepeter or \"Carne de Onça\" in Curitiba where this dish is very common and served covered with chives.\n\nEthiopians have long eaten a dish of raw, minced beef called kitfo.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "825876", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=825876", "title": "Caviar", "text": "Caviar\n\nCaviar (less often, caviare) is a delicacy consisting of salt-cured roe of the Acipenseridae family. The roe can be \"fresh\" (non-pasteurized) or pasteurized, with pasteurization reducing its culinary and economic value.\n\nTraditionally, the term \"caviar\" refers only to roe from wild sturgeon in the Caspian Sea and Black Sea (Beluga, Ossetra and Sevruga caviars). Depending on the country, \"caviar\" may also be used to describe the roe of other species of sturgeon or other fish such as salmon, steelhead, trout, lumpfish, whitefish, or carp.\n\nCaviar is considered a delicacy and is eaten as a garnish or a spread.\n\nAccording to the United Nations' Food and Agriculture Organization, roe from any fish not belonging to the Acipenseriformes order (including Acipenseridae, or sturgeon \"sensu stricto\", and Polyodontidae or paddlefish) are not caviar, but \"substitutes of caviar.\" This position is also adopted by the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, the World Wide Fund for Nature, the United States Customs Service, and France.\n\nThe term \"caviar\" is sometimes used as a euphemism to describe dishes that are perceived to resemble caviar, such as \"eggplant caviar\" (made from eggplant) and \"Texas caviar\" (made from black-eyed peas).\n\nCaviar and sturgeon from the Sea of Azov began reaching the tables of aristocratic and noble Byzantine Greeks in the 10th century, after the commencement of large-scale trading between the Byzantine Empire and Kievan Rus'.\n\nThe main types of caviar are Beluga, Sterlet, Kaluga hybrid, American osetra, Ossetra, Siberian sturgeon and Sevruga. The rarest and costliest is from beluga sturgeon that swim in the Caspian Sea, which is bordered by Iran, Kazakhstan, Russia, Turkmenistan, and Azerbaijan. Wild caviar production was suspended in Russia between 2008 and 2011 to allow wild stocks to replenish. Azerbaijan and Iran also allow the fishing of sturgeon off their coasts. Beluga caviar is prized for its soft, extremely large (pea-size) eggs. It can range in color from pale silver-gray to black. It is followed by the small golden sterlet caviar which is rare and was once reserved for Russian, Iranian and Austrian royalty. Next in quality is the medium-sized, light brown to rich brown Ossetra, also known as Russian caviar. Others in the quality ranking are the gray sevruga caviar, the Chinese Kaluga caviar, and the American osetra. The Siberian variety with black beads is similar to sevruga and is popular because of its reduced (5 years) harvest period, but it's more briny than other kinds. The Chinese Kaluga hybrid varies in color from dark gray to light golden green and is a close cousin of beluga caviar.\n\nCheaper alternatives have been developed from the roe of whitefish and the North Atlantic salmon. Other caviar of note is harvested from sturgeon hybrids, such as A. gueldenstaedtii/A. baerii and H. dauricus/A. schrencki, and marketed under brand-specific names such as platinum caviar or as daurenki, depending on the supplier.\n\nIn the wake of over-fishing, the harvest and sale of black caviar was banned in Russia in 2007. The ban on sturgeon fishing in the Caspian Sea has led to the development of aquaculture as an economically viable means of commercial caviar production.\n\nIn recent years Transnistria built and put into operation a modern sturgeon complex for caviar production, producing natural black caviar of sterlet, bester, Russian sturgeon, and beluga. The design capacity of the fish-breeding zone is equal to 50-80 tons of commodity fish and 5 tons of caviar a year.\n\nChina has emerged as the leading producer, accounting for 60% of the world production in caviar. The largest caviar company in the world is the Chinese brand Kaluga Queen, which cultivates sturgeon at Qiandao Lake in Zhejiang.\n\nIn the early 20th century, Canada and the United States were the major caviar suppliers to Europe; they harvested roe from the lake sturgeon in the North American midwest, and from the shortnose sturgeon and the Atlantic sturgeon spawning in the rivers of the Eastern coast of the United States. The American caviar industry got started when Henry Schacht, a German immigrant, opened a business catching sturgeon on the Delaware River. He treated his caviar with German salt and exported a great deal of it to Europe. At around the same time, sturgeon was fished from the Columbia River on the west coast, also supplying caviar. At the time, American caviar was so plentiful that it was given away at bars with the intent of inducing or prolonging thirst in patrons.\n\nToday, the shortnose sturgeon is rated \"Vulnerable\" in the IUCN Red List of endangered species and rated \"Endangered\" per the Endangered Species Act. With the depletion of Caspian and Black Sea caviar, production of farmed or \"sustainable\" caviar has greatly increased. In particular, northern California is reported to account for 70% to 80% of U.S. production.\n\nIn Canada, a sturgeon farm called Target Marine Hatcheries is now the first producer of organic caviar in North America called \"Northern Divine\".\n\nAs well as Canada and the United States, Uruguay has become a major producer and exporter.\n\nKibbutz Dan in Israel produces 4 tons of caviar a year. The farm is fed by the Dan River, a tributary of the Jordan River.\n\nThe British Royal family has held a long affinity with the sturgeon since 1324, when Edward II decreed it a Royal fish, whereby all sturgeons found within the foreshore of the Kingdom are decreed property of the monarch. Today, in the United Kingdom there is one producer of sturgeon caviar, KC Caviar. Prior to starting caviar production in the United Kingdom, the company received a letter from Buckingham Palace confirming that the Queen would not extend the royal prerogative and that the sturgeon held by KC Caviar would therefore remain the property of the company.\nBeluga sturgeon were common in the Po river in Italy in the 16th century, and were used to produce caviar.\n\nCristoforo da Messisbugo in his book \"Libro novo nel qual si insegna a far d'ogni sorte di vivanda\", Venice, 1564, at page 110, gave the first recorded recipe in Italy about extraction of the eggs from the roe and caviar preparation \"to be consumed fresh or to preserve\".\nThe writer and voyager Jérôme Lalande in his book \"\"Voyage en Italie\"\", Paris, 1771, vol. 8 page 269, noted that many sturgeon were caught in the Po delta area in the territory of Ferrara.\nIn 1753 a diplomatic war broke out between the Papal States, governing the Ferrara territory, and the Venetian Republic about sturgeon fishing rights in the Po river, the border between the two states. From about 1920 and until 1942 there was a shop in Ferrara, named \"Nuta\" from the nickname of the owner Benvenuta Ascoli, that processed all the sturgeons caught in the Po river for caviar extraction, using an elaboration of the original Messisbugo recipe, and shipped it to Italy and Europe. Production was sporadically continued by a new owner until 1972, when sturgeon stopped swimming up the Po river. Since 2015, some sturgeon have reappeared in the Po.\nCurrently, Italian caviar is obtained almost entirely from bred sturgeons. The caviar production is concentrated predominantly in Brescia, which is considered the capital of Italian caviar: in this area, in Calvisano, is located the world's largest sturgeons farm that produces annually 25 tonnes of caviar. Italian caviar is generally the most sold and appreciated in the world: Italy is the world's leading producer.\n\nThe 17th-century book \"Don Quixote\" mentions \"cavial\" in a banquet of German pilgrims.\nUntil 1992, sturgeons and caviar were collected at the lower parts of rivers Guadalquivir, Ebro, Duero and Tajo.\nFrom 1932 to 1970, the Ybarra family had a factory in Coria del Río.\nOverfishing, pollution and the Alcalá del Río dam eliminated the wild population of \"Acipenser naccarii\".\nIn Spain, a fish farm called Caviar de Riofrío produces organic caviar at Loja, Granada, Andalusia.\n\nThe Iranian caviar is a very lucrative export good of Iran, with roughly half being collected from sturgeons near Bandar Torkaman.\n\nCaviar Court, in Dammam, Saudi Arabia, was established in 2001 and began harvesting caviar in 2007. It produced about five tons per year in 2011 and is building a larger facility in Abu Dhabi hoping to produce 35 tons by 2015.\n\nOver-fishing, smuggling and pollution caused by sewage entry into the Caspian Sea have considerably reduced the sea's sturgeon population.\n\nIn September 2005, the United States Fish and Wildlife Service banned the import of Caspian Sea Beluga caviar to protect the endangered Beluga sturgeon; a month later, the ban was extended to include Beluga caviar from the entire Black Sea basin. In January 2006, the Convention on the International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Flora and Fauna (CITES) supported an international embargo on caviar export. In January 2007, this ban was partly lifted, allowing the sale of 96 tons of caviar, 15% below the official 2005 level. In July 2010, Russia and some other CIS countries restarted the export of caviar. The 2010 quotas allow for the export of three tons of beluga, 17 tons of sevruga and 27 tons of osetra. In September 2010, Kazakhstan launched a state monopoly brand, Zhaik Balyk, from the Kazakh word for the Ural River. Under the CITES agreement, Kazakhstan was granted the right to produce 13 out of the 80 tons allowed up until 28 February 2011.\n\nCommercial caviar production historically involved stunning the fish and extracting the ovaries. Another method of extracting caviar is by performing a caesarean section, which allows the female to continue producing roe. Other farmers use a process called \"stripping\", which extracts the caviar from the fish via a small incision made along the urogenital muscle when the fish is deemed to be ready to be processed. An ultrasound is used to determine the correct timing.\n\nPreparation follows a sequence that has not significantly changed over the last century. First, the ovaries are removed from a sedated female sturgeon and passed through a sieve to remove the membrane. Freed roes are rinsed to wash away impurities. Roes are now ready to become caviar by adding a precise amount of salt for taste and preservation. The fresh product is tasted and graded according to quality. Finally, the golden eggs are packed into lacquer-lined tins that will be further processed or sold directly to customers.\n\nIn coastal British Columbia, Fraser River white sturgeon are sustainably farmed to produce caviar.\n\nIn Scandinavia, a cheaper version of caviar is made from mashed and smoked cod roe (\"smörgåskaviar\" meaning \"sandwich caviar\") sold in tubes as a sandwich spread, however this Swedish \"Felix Sandwich Caviar\" cannot be called \"caviar\" in Finland. Instead it is called \"Felix Roe Paste\". When sold outside Scandinavia, the product is referred to as \"creamed smoked roe\" or in French as \"Caviar de Lysekil\".\n\nA sturgeon caviar imitation is a black or red coloured lumpsucker caviar sold throughout Europe in small glass jars. A more expensive alternative sold in Sweden and Finland is caviar from the vendace. In Finland caviars from burbot and common whitefish are also sold, but not as \"caviar\", since the word \"caviar\" is exclusively reserved for sturgeon roe.\n\nThere are also kosher and vegan caviar substitutes made of seaweeds such as \"Laminaria hyperborea\". They closely resemble beluga caviar in appearance and are either used as a food prop for television and film, or enjoyed by vegetarians and other people throughout the world.\n\nAnother common technique is to use spherification of liquids to recreate the texture, albeit not the flavour, of caviar.\n\nCaviar is extremely perishable and must be kept refrigerated until consumption. Pasteurized caviar has a slightly different texture. It is less perishable and may not require refrigeration before opening. Pressed caviar is composed of damaged or fragile eggs and can be a combination of several different roes. It is specially treated, salted, and pressed.\n\nAlthough a spoonful of caviar supplies the adult daily requirement of vitamin B, it is also high in cholesterol and salt.\n1 tablespoon (16 g) of caviar contains:\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "832122", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=832122", "title": "Space hopper", "text": "Space hopper\n\nA space hopper (also known as a moon hopper, skippyball, kangaroo ball, bouncer, hippity hop, hoppity hop, sit and bounce, or hop ball) is a rubber ball (similar to an exercise ball) with handles which allow one to sit on it without falling off. The user can hop around on the toy, using the elastic properties of the ball to move forward.\n\nThe term \"space hopper\" is more common in the United Kingdom; the toy is less familiar in the United States, and may be known as a \"hoppity hop\", \"hippity hop\" or a \"sit n bounce\". A similar toy popular in the United States in the 1980s was the pogo ball, which has a hard plastic ring encircling the ball instead of a handle.\n\nThe space hopper is a heavy rubber balloon about in diameter, with two rubber handles protruding from the top. A valve at the top allows the balloon to be inflated by a bicycle pump or car tire pump.\n\nA child can sit on top, holding the two handles, and bounce up and down until the balloon leaves the ground. By leaning, the driver can make the balloon bounce in a particular direction. In practical terms, this is a very inefficient form of locomotion, but its simplicity, ease of use, low cost and cheerful appearance appeal to children.\n\nThe space hopper was invented by Aquilino Cosani of Ledragomma, an Italian company that manufactured toy rubber balls. He patented the idea in Italy in 1968, and in the United States in 1971. Cosani called the toy \"Pon-Pon\".\n\nSpace hoppers were introduced to the United Kingdom in 1969. The \"Cambridge Evening News\" newspaper, England, contained an advertisement for the hopper in November of that year and described it as a trend. The space hopper became a major craze for several years, and remained widely popular through the 1980s. They are sometimes considered a symbol of the 1970s.\n\nThe original space hopper of the United Kingdom was manufactured by Mettoy (Mettoy-Corgi). Wembley made a similar model which had smooth handles rather than the ribbed original. The orange kangaroo design is now available in adult sized versions in the United Kingdom.\n\nIn the United States, the first mass-marketed hopping ball (a version of an earlier European toy) was the Hoppity Hop, released by the Sun company around 1968. Because of the market and media saturation by this toy, any such ball regardless of origin, is now generally known in the United States by that name (or sometimes \"hippity hop\" as it was originally called in the United States).\n\nThe earliest Hoppity Hops were made of rubber (usually red or blue) with a round ring handle on top and automotive tire valve for inflation. In the 1970s Sun introduced various character versions of the Hoppity Hop, such as the Hoppity Horse, Disney's Mickey Mouse and Donald Duck (with hard plastic versions of the character's head attached to the ball).\n\nThe Hoppity Hop sold rather steadily for decades, but by the 1990s sales apparently started to slip due to increased competition from foreign hoppers. At some point, the Hoppity Hop came to be made of a vinyl like material, some molded in fluorescent colors. The Hoppity Hop now appears to have been discontinued, but the original – sometimes still in the box – comes up from time to time on online auction sites.\n\nAccording to advertising materials, the Hoppity Hop's original targets were both adults and children. Since the balls only inflated to around , however, it is doubtful that any but the shortest adults could have gotten much use out of one. Today, numerous versions can be found in most stores, ranging anywhere from . Many are manufactured in China.\n\nThe European \"Hop!\" balls appeared in the beginning of the 1990s and are still available. Made by Italy's Ledragomma/Ledraplastic, these are essentially the quality exercise ball with a handle attached. The sizes of these balls range from the \"Hop! 45\" to the \"Hop! 66\" (66 cm, about 26 in).\n\nWhile it is still used for fun and exercise by many adults, the Hop! 66 is still borderline child sized. So demand for truly adult proportioned hopping balls was met with two notable items. The first of these was Kitt 2000 Velp, of the Netherlands Mega Skippyballs, a large hopping ball which by virtue of its size was intended only for adult use. There were three sizes: , and . \n\nThe Mega Skippyballs are made of extra-strong vinyl, and in the Netherlands there are various Skippyball races and Skippyball championships.\n\nThe British animated sketch show \"Monkey Dust\" features the recurring character Ivan 'The Meat-Safe Murderer' Dobsky, a man imprisoned in 1974 for a crime he didn't commit, being finally released in every episode with no possessions other than a variety of 1970s clothing and a space hopper called Mr. Hoppy. Mr. Hoppy is eventually revealed to be both sentient and responsible for the Meat-Safe Murders himself (as well as the murder of Dobsky's wife of several hours).\n\nThe humorous science fiction novel and audio book \"Kangazang\" features space hoppers (referred to as 'Hoppas') who are depicted as an alien race living on the planet Profania Alpha. The space hopper character of Pon-Pon is instrumental in helping the two main characters save the universe.\n\nSpace hoppers can be seen being used in the background of one scene in Episode 59 of \"\", \"And the Children Shall Lead\". Episode 12, season 2 (production number 19) of the popular British comedy from the 1970s \"The Goodies\" was mostly related to space hoppers. The plot of the episode (called \"Charity Bounce\") involved a charity bounce on space hoppers from London to Brighton.\n\nThe space hopper lent its name and face to the Birmingham psychedelic trance parties that ran from the mid 1990s to 2000, and also appeared at the Glastonbury festival. In a Season 7 episode of \"Friends\", \"The One Where They All Turn Thirty\", Phoebe bounced for one mile on a Hippity Hop, this being on a list she had made of things to do before turning 30.\n\nIn \"Doctor Who\" Series 3, Episode 11 \"Utopia\", the Tenth Doctor refers to Captain Jack's Vortex Manipulator as a space hopper in contrast to his TARDIS, which he calls a sports car. The pornographic parody film \"Bat Pussy\" (1973) features the titular character using a space hopper for transportation. A character named Space Hopper, which resembles a toy space hopper, appears in Ian Stewart's book \"Flatterland\".\n\n"}
{"id": "833373", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=833373", "title": "Foul ball", "text": "Foul ball\n\nIn baseball, a foul ball is a batted ball that:\n\n\nA foul fly shall be judged according to the relative position of the ball and the foul line, including the foul pole, and not as to whether the fielder is on foul or fair territory at the time he touches the ball.\n\nAdditionally, ballpark ground rules may specify that batted balls striking certain fixed objects such as railings, nets, or a roof if present are foul balls. \n\nFoul territory or foul ground is defined as that part of the playing field outside the first and third base lines extended to the fence and perpendicularly upwards. Note: the foul lines and foul poles are not part of foul territory.\n\nIn general, when a batted ball is ruled a foul ball, the ball is dead, all runners must return to their time-of-pitch base without liability to be put out, and the batter returns to home plate to continue his turn at bat. A strike is issued for the batter if he had fewer than two strikes. If the batter already has two strikes against him when he hits a foul ball, a strike is not issued unless the ball was bunted to become a foul ball, in which case a third strike \"is\" issued and a strikeout recorded for the batter and pitcher. A strike is, however, recorded for the pitcher for every foul ball the batter hits, regardless of the count. If any member of the fielding team catches a foul ball before it touches the ground or lands outside the field perimeter, the batter is out. However, the caught ball is in play and base runners may attempt to advance.\n\nA foul ball is different from a foul tip, in which the ball makes contact with the bat, travels directly to the catcher's hands, and is caught. In this case, the ball remains live and a strike is added to the batter's count. If a foul tip is strike three, the batter is out.\n\nOn rare occasions, such as in extra innings or the ninth inning of a tie game when a runner is on third base, with less than two outs, fielders have been known to let long foul flies drop rather than risk losing the game on a sacrifice fly. Sometimes, in that situation, a fielder will not try to catch a ball that is close to the foul line in the hope that the ball will go foul at the last second.\nIn different situations, a foul ball may be considered a positive or negative outcome of a pitch or swing. When there are zero or one strikes, a foul ball counts as a strike, benefiting the pitcher. However, a foul ball may reveal to the batter that he has timed a pitch well and need only make adjustment to the location of his swing on the next such pitch; this is often called a \"good cut\" or simply a good swing. Foul balls with two strikes are generally considered positive for the batter, since he thus avoids strike three on a potentially difficult pitch. Also, foul balls with two strikes increase the pitcher's pitch count, adding to his/her fatigue, thus providing some small advantage to the offense. A strategy of swinging on any ball to try to produce additional fouls and prolong an at-bat is often used against strong pitchers to try to drive them from the game sooner (and also the possibility of the pitcher throwing a pitch a hitter can get a hit on); this does, however, have the disadvantage of generating more strikeouts.\n\n"}
{"id": "833399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=833399", "title": "Fair ball", "text": "Fair ball\n\nIn baseball, a fair ball is a batted ball that entitles the batter to attempt to reach first base. By contrast, a foul ball is a batted ball that does not entitle the batter to attempt to reach first base. Whether a batted ball is fair or foul is determined by the location of the ball at the appropriate reference point, as follows:\n\n\nIf the ball is on or above fair territory at the appropriate reference point, it is fair; else it is foul. Fair territory or fair ground is defined as the area of the playing field between the two foul lines, and includes the foul lines themselves and the foul poles. However, certain exceptions exist:\n\n\nOn a fair ball, the batter attempts to reach first base or any subsequent base, runners attempt to advance and fielders try to record outs. A fair ball is considered a live ball until the ball becomes dead by leaving the field or any other method.\n"}
{"id": "837481", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=837481", "title": "Hoop cheese", "text": "Hoop cheese\n\nHoop cheese is a simple, traditional cheese made only from milk, where the whey has been totally pressed out. It is different from farmer cheese in that farmer cheese is made with milk, cream and salt, while hoop cheese is made from milk alone.\n\nHoop cheese is difficult to find commercially in the United States, due to the difficulty of automating the manufacturing process. It was once so popular, however, that a device called a hoop cheese cutter was manufactured and used in general stores during the late 19th and early 20th centuries. This object resembled a turntable with a knife blade suspended above it. It was built by scale companies of the period to cut the exact amount of cheese the customer wanted.\n\nHoop cheese can be found at many small restaurants and independent gas stations and grocers throughout the southern part of the USA.\n"}
{"id": "838244", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=838244", "title": "Banquet", "text": "Banquet\n\nA banquet (; ) is a formal large meal or feast, often involving main courses and desserts. The meal tends to serve a purpose such as a charitable gathering, a ceremony, or a celebration, frequently involved either precededing or following speeches in honor of the topic or guest of honour. \n\nDespite the controversy surrounding the origins of feasting, numerous theories have been suggested. According to archaeologist Brian Hayden, feasts were an important social event either facilitated by or featuring the surplus of food, resulting in the experience gaining social and political ties and a competitive element to display one's own wealth. Whilst Bendall suggests the importance of luxury foods, Hayden argues the likelihood that animal meat and rice were part of these luxury goods. \n\nBanqueting, as a notion, has manifested itself in a variety of forms throughout history. In Ancient Greece, symposia, an early kind of banquet, formed a routine part of life involving the celebratory drinking of wine, sonversation and performances of poetry and music. \n\nBanquets persisted in popularity over the years including Belshazzar's Feast, Last Supper, Manchu Han Imperial Feast, and Mead halls.\n\nBy the Middle Ages, the event had become more structured with comprehensive ritualised elements were involved in the traditional three course menu, which could have have up to 25 dishes in each course (this structure persisted into the nineteeth century). The structure was later altered to two courses with the pre-existing third course changed to the serving of fruit and nuts. \n\nBanqueting rooms varied greatly with location, but tended to be on an intimate scale, either in a garden room, banquet hall or inside such as the small banqueting turrets in Longleat House.\n\n\n"}
