{"id": "68460", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68460", "title": "Lada Niva", "text": "Lada Niva\n\nThe Lada 4×4, formerly called the Lada Niva (; \"Niva \"(нива) is the Russian word for \"cornfield\"), is an off-road vehicle designed and produced by the Russian (former Soviet) manufacturer AvtoVAZ specifically for the rural market, although models made for urban use are sold.\n\nIt was the first mass-production off-road vehicle to combine a unibody architecture with a coil-sprung independent front suspension, and is a predecessor to current crossover SUVs, which nearly all follow this format; it inspired the Suzuki Vitara. Like the Vitara, the Lada 4×4 uses a recirculating-ball truck steering box for off-road reliability. Pickup and emergency-van versions are produced by VAZInterService.\n\nThe Lada 4×4 was formerly called the Lada Niva. The name change occurred after the Niva brand was transferred to General Motors, though AvtoVAZ retains the rights to the equivalent Cyrillic name, \"Нива\". It was also marketed as the Lada Sport in Iceland, Lada Taiga in Austria, Bognor Diva in Uruguay, and Lada Cossack in the United Kingdom. Since 2014, it has been sold as the LADA 4×4 in Russia, a name which is also beginning to replace \"Niva\" in export markets.\n\nIt was also the first VAZ model, which in additional to the brand's classic export name and the engine displacement, also featured an export name of the model itself (Niva); previous models (the Zhiguli) only featured the brand's export name, Lada, followed by the engine displacement. Also, the Niva was the only VAZ model to use the same model name for both domestic and export markets (VAZ-2121 Niva for domestic, and Lada Niva 1600 for export); the other models had export names different from the names used in the domestic market (for example, the VAZ-2109 Sputnik was the Lada Samara 1500 for export, and the VAZ-2105 Zhiguli, was marked as the Lada Riva 1300 outside the USSR).\n\nThe Niva was described by its designers as a “Renault 5 put on a Land Rover chassis” Development began in 1971, after the 24th Congress of CPSU, where Alexei Kosygin (the then-Premier of the Soviet Union) gave the designers at VAZ and AZLK the task of creating a car suitable for rural areas – for the villagers and farmers of the Soviet Union – since the usual Zhiguli, Moskvitch and Zaporozhets, intended primarily for ordinary people, were not much of use in isolated areas, which made up a large part of the former-USSR. In the same year, a team of VAZ designers, under Vladimir Solovyev as a chief designer, began competing with AZLK to work on a \"civilized\" four-wheel drive vehicle. The new car was inspired in part by the IZh-14 prototype of 1974. It was VAZ's first model not based on Fiat, although much of its mechanics were carried over from the earlier Fiat 124- or 125-based Zhiguli models (mostly the VAZ-2103 and 2106). However, the body, four-wheel drive system, and front suspension were designed by VAZ. The first prototypes appeared quickly in 1971 and 1972, but were rejected as too utilitarian, so doors and a hardtop were added. This version debuted in 1973 and was a major step away from the off-road vehicles of the period, seeing as they used an ordinary car body, in this case a modern hatchback of the time. This took its inspiration from the prototype known as the VAZ-1101 (itself derived from the Fiat 127), and was created by designer Valery Pavlovitch. The 1974 prototype was finally derived from one of already existing models, in this case the VAZ-2103 (then the newest model in VAZ arsenal), by using its 1,452- cc engine, as well as sharing some of its features, like chrome-plated bumpers, as well as its headlights and taillights, instruments, seats, steering wheel, and other parts. The 1974 prototype was ready to be put into mass production in 1975; however, the appearance of new VAZ-2106 at the end of the same year resulted in its delay due to developing another prototype based on that model.\n\nUntil the beginning of its production, the Niva was in trials over a period of years by a team of VAZ testers under Vadim Kotlyarov in the most difficult terrain of former Soviet Union, such as the Ural Mountains and Siberia, as well as deserts of the Kazakh SSR and the Pamir Mountains in the Tajik SSR, where it was put up against its military counterpart the UAZ-469, and even against some Western off-road vehicles: the British-made Land Rover Series and the Range Rover Classic. In these places, it showed its outstanding off-road capabilities, which were mainly due to its effective (permanent) four-wheel drive system featuring a transfer case and central differential lock, together with the excellent combination of relatively low weight (just over a ton) and small dimensions, combined with high ground clearance (about 265 mm). Also, its large, narrow wheels (175/80-R16), originally featuring domestically designed \"Voltyre\" VLI-5 tires, offered relatively strong ground pressure, and thus had good performance in terms of slipping or getting bogged down off-road. For example, in trials during 1973 and 1974, the Niva showed it could climb a 58% slope, and ford of water and of mud or snow. Solovyev died the following year, and his place as a chief designer of the project was then taken by engineer Pyotr Prusov, who in the end took credit for creating the car.\n\nIn 1976, the final prototype appeared, with the engine changed to a , the most powerful engine in VAZ range during Soviet era, taken from their newest model the VAZ-2106 (from which the production model of the first Niva generation was generally derived). It also featured permanent four-wheel drive and a transfer case with a lockable central differential. The VAZ prototype displayed better design and real-world performance than its AZLK counterpart, the Moskvitch 416, so was, after the 25th Congress of CPSU, approved for production in March of the same year. (The Moskvitch prototype was then rejected for serial production by the government.) It was the Niva 1600 (Field) for export, or VAZ-2121 (alternatively Niva 2121 or simply VAZ Niva) for the domestic market in the former Soviet Union. For domestic customers, it was described as: \"A high-speed car with the improved capabilities and comfort of all VAZ models\", and also as: \"A combination of the speed and comfort of a Zhiguli with the capabilities of a UAZ\". Actual production began in the following year on 5 April 1977, while the first export models appeared in 1978 at the Paris Motor Salon and rapidly captured at least 40% of Europe's market for four-wheel drive vehicles, making it Lada's top-selling export. Moreover, it became the only Soviet car that was ever sold in Japan, starting from early 1980s, inspiring their Suzuki Samurai. Because of export demand and the higher priority given to exports, domestic customers faced long waiting lists, despite the fact that the car was developed primarily for the Soviet people, as mentioned above.\n\nInitially, the Niva had a normally aspirated 1.6-l overhead-cam four-cylinder petrol engine producing 56 kW (76 hp) and 126 N·m (93 lb·ft) at 5,000 rpm, a four-speed manual transmission (starting with new model from 1994, a five-speed), and a full-time four-wheel drive.\nThe drive system employs three differentials (center, front, and rear). The transfer case involves a high/low range selector lever and a lever to lock the central differential. Low range can be selected with the center differential locked or unlocked. Like the usual gear shifting, both of the mentioned features naturally require the use of clutch to be properly used (selected). However, while the central differential can be usually locked while in motion, the transfer case requires the car to be firstly brought to a complete stop in order to be changed to low gear, otherwise, a serious damage of transfer case and transmission is inevitable - approximately equal to consequence of shifting of gears without the use of clutch or shifting in reverse gear while the car is in forward motion, as an example. The original Niva had a maximum speed of , and can cruise at while consuming petrol at . Its towing capacity is rated for up to 860 kg (1900 lb).\n\nCoil springs are located at each of the four wheels, and suspension is independent in front, whereas the rear axle is a five-link live-type, with ratios between 3.90 and 4.30 depending on the model and market. Ground clearance is good at 235 mm (9.25 in) and water 510 mm (20 in) deep can be negotiated.\n\nThe brakes (disc front, drum rear) are servo-assisted dual-circuit style and the clutch is hydraulic. The turning circle is a relatively low 36.25 ft. Cargo space is 0.48 m³ (17 ft³), or 1.33 m³ (47 ft³) with the rear seats folded down and, like the classic Zhiguli, the front seats can be set up to make two berths (by removing headrests, shifting the seats into foremost position and setting the backrest in plane with the back seat – this feature later disappeared when the new model with different seats was introduced in 1994). A spare tyre is located in the engine bay under the bonnet. The latter feature is considered a useful and practical feature by off-road fans.\n\nAdditional equipment for the basic model was rather simple and was equal to other Lada and generally Eastern bloc cars of the period, as it included headlight wipers, rear fog lamp, right external mirror (right mirror for domestic models only, since the export ones had both by default, but at the end of 1980s, even domestic models of all Lada cars also received both mirrors), then rear seat belts, rear (tailgate) window wiper, rear window heater, and a radio set. On new model (Niva 1.7/VAZ-21213) starting from 1994, all those features except headlight wipers and rear fog lamp (which are discontinued) became default and optional is air conditioning, antilock braking system, and hydraulic servomotor for the steering column, which are now becoming parts of standard equipment on the newest models.\n\nForeign (usually Western) local Lada importers often also offered their own additional equipment (mainly for off-roading) prior to buying the car, such as front and rear bull bars and roll bars, side rocker rails, roof rails, winch, fender plastics, additional headlights for front bumper and for roof rails and even aftermarket (aluminium) rims, which can be often seen mounted on many Nivas.\n\nThe existing model was slightly restyled during first half of 1980s, when VAZ for the first time discontinued one of its models, the VAZ-2103 (which was slowly being replaced with VAZ-2106 since 1975). Some of the chromed elements have disappeared in all future models due to high price and complexity of production, such as, in Niva case, the chromed mask and rocker panel edges, which were removed, as well as external/side mirrors, which became black metallic. Chrome even disappeared from ashtrays and door panel edges. Also, background of front Lada badge was changed to white (later black; on new model) on all models instead of red as until then. Rear Niva 1600 tailgate label (which was originally located in the center of the tailgate) was relocated to its right corner due to rear window wiper, which was, on buyer request, installed onto its former place as additional equipment. Side rear retroreflectors (or turn signals on some models; depended on market) were replaced by Lada (left) and Niva (right) labels and the rear mudflaps received the brand logo on them. Interior was only minimally changed, along with some minor changes to the instrument panel, choke knob, and other details, probably the most notable differences are firstly in its VAZ-2106 steering wheel, which was now decorated with classic Russian ornaments featuring the Lada logo on its central (leather) part and slightly different leather pattern on seats.\n\nThose pre-1985 models are visually best recognizable by mentioned details and are today extremely rare (in preserved condition almost nonexistent anymore), so are very valued by collectors.\n\nThe first generation (VAZ-2121 Niva, or Lada Niva 1600 as known commercially) was in production until 1993 (existing in parallel in production with new model until the end of the same year) when the new and more powerful (1.7-l, 80 horsepower) four-cylinder petrol engine (designed purposely for Niva, thus was not used by any other VAZ model until then) was introduced, replacing the previously used (1.6-l, 75-hp) VAZ-2106 engine and making the appearance of the new model (VAZ-21213/21214 or Lada Niva 1.7/1.7i), as was the carburetor replaced by single-point fuel injection supplied initially by General Motors on 21214/1.7i model and the usual Weber carburetor was replaced by improved Solex one on 21213/1.7 model. The transmission was changed from four to five speeds, mechanical ignition was replaced with electronic and suspension received some relatively minor changes. The exhaust system was also slightly redesigned, and on newer models, the drive shafts received homokinetic joints instead of usual universal ones. Also, the exterior rear section of the body was redesigned with the tailgate extended and license plate as a part of it (so it could have a lower opening, now bordering with the rear bumper), due to which it also received new, vertical taillights, replacing the former VAZ-2106 horizontal ones and VAZ-2102 chromed tailgate knob, which was replaced by a simple plastic handle (which now opens from interior; below the driver's seat, in contrast to previous which required a side doors key to be opened exclusively from the outside). On newest models, the old hand-adjustable, square black-metallic (previously chromed) side mirrors, which originated from 1970s VAZ-2103 were finally replaced with larger plastic ones featuring automatic adjustment. The previous front Lada badge was also replaced with the current and larger one of ellipsoid design. However, the aging Fiat 125 chromed doorknobs are still present, although they are not chromed anymore on newest models, but plastic. Although the rest of the exteriors remained generally unchanged to this day (except for LADA 4×4 URBAN and BRONTO), the interior was, however, almost completely redesigned and shares only a few interchangeable parts with the previous one; the archaic VAZ-2106 steering wheel with chrome elements was replaced with more modern and thicker one, firstly from VAZ-2107 and later even newer, as well as its VAZ-2103/2106 instruments, which were replaced with dashboard from VAZ-21099. The berth-foldable, black artificial leather seats, which were also originated from the VAZ-2106 were replaced by more modern and higher ones from the VAZ-2108 with the front surface made out of polyester (with which the berth feature disappeared), while the rear seat was improved to fold easier. The old Fiat 124 swivelling windows from side doors disappeared and were replaced with air conditioning for that role, which is on request, (together with ABS and servomotor for the steering column) installed as additional equipment, while headlight wipers and rear fog lamp disappeared. It also received completely new front and door panels (with interior door knobs relocated above the handrests instead of under like on previous generation), various plastics and even new floor mats. The hand opening of side-door windows was replaced with automatic on newest models (and on LADA 4×4 URBAN), starting from 2014. Multipoint fuel injection designed by Bosch is used since 2004, replacing the previously mentioned single-point injection from General Motors.\n\nIn 1993, the lengthened model of Niva appeared for the first time, known as VAZ-2129 and was being produced very briefly (only for about a year) due to which it is very rare and was also never exported. Although having a much longer wheelbase, it retained usual three doors like the basic hatchback model (it only featured additional square middle window added at the sides); however, in design it was actually a hybrid of old and new generations, since it featured the old VAZ-2121 (Niva 1600) body and interiors combined with new VAZ-21213 (Niva 1.7) 1680-cc engine and 5-speed transmission (although later, 1994 production models featured even new body and interiors).\n\nIn 1995, the lengthened estate model with longer wheelbase and five-door appeared, originally known as the VAZ-2131 Niva; commercially, it has no difference in name than standard (three-door) model, which is why it is often referred simply as Niva five- door. Due to itds longer wheelbase and thus increased weight, it can use the even more powerful 1774-cc inline four petrol engine, producing 63kW/85 hp. Although still in production like the basic model, it had limited use and is also infrequently exported, mainly due to longer wheelbase and increased weight offering somewhat inferior off-road capabilities, as well as slightly higher price when compared to the standard model. In 2015, the five-door model also appeared for LADA 4×4 URBAN.\n\nIn 1999, a diesel-engine model of Niva appeared for the first time, known as the VAZ-21215 Niva or commercially as the Lada Niva 1.9, which was produced until 2007 and sold only in few markets. It was powered by a 1905-cc Peugeot XUD 9SD inline four diesel engine, delivering 55kW/75 hp, so was slightly less powerful than the standard VAZ-21213/21214 1680-cc petrol engine (it was roughly equal in power to 1568-cc VAZ-2106 engine used by the previous generation). However, the VAZ-21215 was a relatively short-lived model and is not available because, despite much lower fuel consumption, it was not very popular in domestic market (mainly due to harsh winter conditions, less power, lower reliability, higher price, and higher maintenance costs when compared to the petrol-engine model), as well as Peugeot stopping production of XUD engines back in 2001 (existing supplies were available until 2007, when the last VAZ-21215 came off the production line) and VAZ never made another contract for production of diesel engines for Niva.\n\nIn 2006, the model with carbureted engine of new generation (VAZ-21213/Lada Niva 1.7) was discontinued, and in the same year, the name Niva was formally dropped in favor to new official name LADA 4×4 (although the former name was still being used in export markets at least until 2009 and it is still informally used world wide). This was done because General Motors (which first supplied an injection system to VAZ) got rights to the name Niva, which had to be discontinued in further production, together with old Soviet VAZ-2121 classification for the domestic market, which was loosely abandoned by the plant itself at the end of 1990s.\n\nIn 2014, the new, restyled model called LADA 4×4 URBAN appeared, with generally more modern looks resembling an ordinary SUV; new mask, plastic bumpers, new side mirrors, different (aluminium) rims (with the original Soviet \"Voltyre\" VLI-5 off-road tires replaced with classic road tires), central brake light, heated front seats, airbags, and slightly restyled interior. However, it did not replace the current LADA 4×4 , which remains in parallel production with it.\n\nIn 2017, another model appeared, the LADA 4×4 BRONTO, intended mainly for off-road use. It features characteristic mask and plastic bumpers with integrated front and rear fog lamps, as well as plastic roof rails and larger wheels with new, black aluminium rims featuring new 235/75-R16 \"Bontyre Stalker\" domestically produced off-road tires, even higher ground clearance (increased for further 35 mm) and plastic rust-protected body edges (fenders and rocker panels). Internally, it is similar to the LADA 4×4 URBAN, also featuring heated front seats and airbags. Additional equipment includes a front winch, roof headlights, and additional fog lights on the front bumper. With all mentioned equipment included, the BRONTO is currently the most expensive LADA 4×4 model with a current price of 720 thousand RU in the domestic market (around €10.130). The slightly different pickup model designed by VIS was also revealed (featuring integrated metallic grille, different bumpers, and a snorkel), called LADA BRONTO AMC; however, according to LADA official website, it is not serially produced yet becauset it is not offered anywhere on sale.\n\nOn 5 April of the same year, at the car's 40th anniversary since the beginning of production, a special, limited edition of the classic LADA 4×4 was presented, called the LADA 4×4 40th-Anniversary, which was made in exactly 1977 copies (the year when Lada Niva appeared). It features new aluminium rims, (similar to the URBAN), as well as five new color schemes, \"40th Anniversary\" metallic labels on the fenders, tailgate, glove compartment cover, front-seat backrests, and floor mats. Also, it has slightly restyled interior featuring genuine leather seat upholstery and steering wheel cover, as well as sills made out of stainless steel. The model is available from June 2017 in both domestic and export markets.\n\nA soft-top version appeared back in 1983, but it was neither serially produced nor designed by its native VAZ, but was actually just a modification of the original Niva 1600 (2121) bodied by French coachbuilder Wassermann for the local market. This was known as the Niva Plein Soleil (Sunlight) and was just one of many Niva modifications made by local importers for their markets. (Lada Cossack, Hussar, and Lada Taiga as examples, were modifications for British and West German markets).\n\nDuring the 1980s, local Lada importers in various markets made their own upgrades to help compete with more modern SUVs. In the UK, the Cossack model featured large body decals, roof rails, running boards, 15-in alloy wheels, and on some versions, a sunroof, steel bullbars, spotlights, a rear-mounted spare tyre, and semibucket seats. Other markets' importers made similar upgrades and many were also called Cossack.\n\nIn 1995, Lada UK introduced a face-lifted version of the Niva Cossack and renamed the basic model as the \"Hussar\". Whereas the Hussar had the original 1977 trim, the new UK Cossack featured a new Rover-designed grille and other body kit items, and gained soft nudge-bars at the front in deference to public opinion against bullbars. Both models received the same new 1.7-litre engine and a new deeper tailgate which extended the rear opening to the level of the bumper – a vast improvement over the original model's high lip. Official Niva imports to the UK ceased in 1997 due to the importers having difficulty in sourcing the GM fuel injection unit required to satisfy ever-tightening UK emissions regulations.\n\nSeveral attempts were made to reintroduce Ladas into the UK. In May 2010, the basic Niva became available again, through an independent importer. Aimed largely at the agricultural market, three models were made available (all left-hand drive), the three-door, four-seat hatchback at £10,000, a two-seat commercial van at £8000, and a two-door, four-seat pickup for £12,000. All meet the current UK Vehicle Certification Agency standards. The only engine available is the 1.7-l petrol, but this can be provided with or without a liquefied petroleum gas conversion.\n\nAlthough VAZ were meant exclusively for production of passenger cars, thus the Niva was intended to be a strictly civilian vehicle, the Soviet military was truly astonished by its fascinating off-road capabilities, so it ordered a military version to be created from VAZ, which could replace the currently used UAZ-469 as standard military 4×4 vehicle. In 1976, when VAZ-2121 development was almost finished, engineers from Tolyatti began working on an amphibian off-roader, which became known as VAZ-2122 Reka (River), using completely different, and naturally tougher body of a usual military vehicle (with a classic feature of the spare wheel located on the back of the body instead in the engine compartment like on a classic Niva) in combination with ordinary Niva chassis and wheels, together with its permanent four-wheel drive system (transfer case and locking differential and mechanics in general, which was intended to be sold to the Soviet Ministry of Defense. Despite having a more rugged body, it weighted about the same as the usual Niva, but instead of the 1600-cc (55kW/75 hp) VAZ-2106 engine, which the Niva had, it used an older and less powerful 1300-cc engine derived from the VAZ-2101, instead, with a lower top speed of on road or in water. Internally, it featured a different, metallic front panel, although it used the same Niva instruments along with the same steering wheel and artificial leather seats.\n\nSix different evolution prototypes were built, and much of development work was done. The car was tested in an experimental military unit, on the proving grounds of the Ministry of Defense, and in the Turkmenistan Karakum Desert. The VAZ-2122 showed better results than then currently used UAZ-469, (especially the fact that it featured amphibious capabilities, which UAZ did not have) and received very positive feedback; the military was satisfied with its capabilities and its reliability, firmness, and durability. By 1987, VAZ had finished all development work, and the car was ready for mass production and military service.\n\nHowever, at the end of the 1980s, the Ministry of Defense did not have the financial resources necessary for large-scale purchases of the VAZ-2122 because it also had some other higher priority projects in which to invest, such as the Tor mobile antiaircraft system, T-80U battle tank, BMP-3 infantry combat vehicle, BM-30 Smerch multiple rocket launcher, 2S19 Msta self-propelled artillery, and others. As a result, the Reka was never put into mass production and remained only in a prototype stage, despite more than 10 years invested in its development.\n\nLonger wheelbase versions – the five-door VAZ-2131, three-door VAZ-2129, and VAZ-2329 pickup were also produced from the 1990s, but not generally exported.\n\nThe Lada Niva was formally renamed LADA 4×4 back in 2006 and it is continued to be offered with a low-range gearbox, differential lock, ABS, airbags, heated front seats, air conditioning, servomotor for the steering column, underbody protection, and more. Prices for the model started at €10,990. It is available in five body styles; three- and five-door hatchbacks, two- and four-door pickups, and a two-door van. Two petrol engines are available for the model - the standard 1.7-l and the 1.8-l (only for five-door model) along with a five-speed manual transmission.\n\nStarting with the 2014 model year, the \"Niva\" nameplate was discontinued for the Russian market, and the vehicle is currently branded as LADA 4×4 for both short and long wheelbases. This was done to make way for the upcoming restart of the Chevrolet Niva series, which was slated to start production by March 2015. However, due to the current economic situation in Russia-West relations, AvtoVAZ analysts have suggested that the production of Chevrolet Niva may indeed get delayed further into 2015, especially considering any upcoming automotive sanctions packages against Russia. AvtoVAZ currently plans on keeping the LADA 4×4/Niva for its domestic market, branding it as an economy-class SUV.\n\nIn 2002, the Lada Niva was awarded zero stars out of a possible four by the modern Russian ARCAP safety-assessment program. The reviewer noted the very rugged body of the car as the only positive aspect in terms of safety. In the test, the passenger dummy was hit by the glove compartment hard enough to risk traumatic brain injury.\n\nThe reviewers noted that they did not expect a high rating and that the result was natural, as \"it would be naive to believe that a 30-year-old design complies with modern requirements for passive safety\". They added it would require the car to be completely modernized to meet modern safety standards.\n\nIn Russia and Europe, the Niva has been used as an ambulance, a military vehicle, and by various police forces and utility companies. It also served for a time as a vehicle for lifeguards on beaches in the Netherlands. In former Czechoslovakia, the Niva was used as a standard police car of their police (\"Public safety\"). The Croatian Army was notable as being the only army that used Nivas (taken from civilians during the wartime) as their standard military 4×4 vehicle due to serious lack of proper military vehicles, such as UAZ-469 or GAZ-69 (which were also in use), until it was later replaced by British Land Rover Defender and Austrian Puch G, which are still being used today.\n\nTransmanche-Link, the commercial consortium that built the Channel Tunnel between England and France, used a fleet of 45 Nivas to aid in the enormous project. Each Niva accumulated in excess of off-road during its employment, and after construction had been completed in 1993, the fleet was sold off to a local dealer.\n\nIn Brazil, the Niva was the best-selling off-road vehicle during the early 1990s. In fact, the Niva was so cheap that even with the 85% importation value tax, it was less expensive than Brazilian competitors such as the Envemo or Gurgel. It sold so much more than the Gurgel Carajás, that Gurgel discontinued production in January 1991. The Niva was the first imported 4×4 in the Brazilian market, following then-Brazilian president Fernando Collor's decision to permit the importation of foreign vehicles in 1990. In the Brazilian market, a used 1991 Niva in good condition costs about R$11,000. Competition and higher importation value taxes forced the Niva to be retired from the Brazilian market. Even so, thousands of Nivas remain in use in Brazil.\n\nNivas have been driven on land, up mountains, through mud, and even under water.\n\nIt was the first wheeled vehicle to spend more than 10 years in Antarctica, where the classic VAZ-2121 Niva (Lada Niva 1600) was used by the Russian (formerly Soviet) Antarctic Expedition for transportation of personnel and goods, communication between Antarctic stations, towing boats, and where it covered more than 40,000 km (24,855 miles) in 1990-2001, thus operating at temperatures down to -54°. Niva also conquered the North Pole in 1998, when the lengthened VAZ-2131 Niva (five-door model) was dropped by parachute on ice and successfully completed its route operating at an average temperature of -30°, thus becoming the first wheeled vehicle to spend time there. Also, it had set the world record of highest point ever reached by a motorized vehicle when another VAZ-2131 climbed to the 5200-m-high base camp on Mount Everest in 1998 and even higher just a year later, on 16 September 1999, when the similar Niva belonging to Saint Petersburg extreme expedition team reached a height of 5725 m on a Tibet mountain during off-roading. \n\nCar manufacturer Bognor in Uruguay assembled a version of the Niva, called Bognor Diva, released in 2004.\n\nIn Greece, the Automeccanica carmaker assembled different versions of the Lada Niva in the late 1980s and early 1990s, including an in-house developed cabrio version.\nGM-AvtoVAZ, a joint venture between AvtoVAZ and General Motors, produces the Chevrolet Niva. (previously known as VAZ-2123 Niva in domestic market). It features an updated body and 1.7-l gasoline engine with fuel injection. Although the body and the interiors are new, it is still based on the old VAZ-2121 engine, transmission, and most mechanicals. Its off-road ability is exemplary compared with many modern budget SUVs, having been designed for tough tundra territory.\n\n\n\n\n\n\nLLC \"motility\" versions:\n\n\nPSA Bronto versions:\n\n\nVIS versions:\n\nThe car can be equipped with a voltage converter 12 -> 220, to supply various medical equipment; additional electric heater med salon.\n\nA notable Niva buyer in May 2009 was Russia's then-Prime Minister Vladimir Putin. He flaunted his camouflage-painted Opel-engined offroader in the Russian media, allegedly to support domestic car producers despite the financial crisis.\n\nSerbian football player Aleksandar Kolarov received a certificate for a Lada 4×4/Niva, as a reward for scoring a goal in his team's match against Costa Rica, during the Russia 2018 World Cup. \n\n\n"}
{"id": "68765", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68765", "title": "Colloquialism", "text": "Colloquialism\n\nIn linguistics, colloquialism is vernacular language including everyday language, everyday speech, common parlance, informal language, general parlance, and common expressions. It is the most used linguistic variety of a language, the language normally used in conversation and other informal communication.\n\nA specific instance of such language is called a \"colloquialism\". The most common term used in dictionaries to label such an expression is colloquial.\n\nGeneral parlance is distinct from formal speech or formal writing. It is the variety of language that speakers typically use when they are relaxed and not especially self-conscious. An expression is labeled \"colloq.\" for \"colloquial\" in dictionaries when a different expression is more common in formal speech, but this does not mean that the colloquial expression is inappropriate in formal speech or writing or that it is necessarily slang. Many people misunderstand this very common dictionary label due to the widespread misconception that \"colloquial\" means \"location\" or a word being \"regional\". This is not the case; the word root for \"colloquial\" is related to locution, not location. \n\nSome colloquial speech contains a great deal of slang, but some contains no slang at all. Slang is permitted in colloquial language, but it is not a necessary element. Other examples of colloquial usage in English include contractions or profanity.\n\nIn the philosophy of language, \"colloquial language\" is ordinary natural language, as distinct from specialized forms used in logic or other areas of philosophy. In the field of logical atomism, meaning is evaluated in a different way than with more formal propositions.\n\nA colloquial name or familiar name is a name or term commonly used to identify a person or thing in informal language, in place of another usually more formal or technical name.\n\nColloquialisms are distinct from slang or jargon. Slang refers to words used only by specific social groups, such as teenagers or soldiers. Colloquial language may include slang, but consists mostly of contractions or other informal words and phrases known to most native speakers of the language.\n\nJargon is terminology that is especially defined in relationship to a specific activity, profession, or group. The term refers to the language used by people who work in a particular area or who have a common interest. Much like slang, it is a kind of shorthand used to express ideas that are frequently discussed between members of a group, though it can also be developed deliberately using chosen terms. While a standard term may be given a more precise or unique usage amongst practitioners of relevant disciplines, it is often reported that jargon is a barrier to communication for those people unfamiliar with the respective field.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "68768", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=68768", "title": "Breakfast", "text": "Breakfast\n\nBreakfast is the first meal of a day. The word in English refers to breaking the fasting period of the prior night. There is a strong tendency for one or more \"typical\", or \"traditional\", breakfast menus to exist in most places, but the composition of this varies widely from place to place, and has varied over time, so that globally a very wide range of preparations and ingredients are now associated with breakfast.\n\nThe Old English word for dinner, \"disner\", means to break a fast, and was the first meal eaten in the day until its meaning shifted in the mid-13th century. It was not until the 15th century that “breakfast” came into use in written English to describe a morning meal, which literally means to break the fasting period of the prior night; in Old English the term was \"morgenmete\" meaning \"morning meal.\"\n\nWhile breakfast is commonly referred to as \"the most important meal of the day\", some epidemiological research indicates that having breakfast high in rapidly available carbohydrates increases the risk of metabolic syndrome. Present professional opinion is largely in favor of eating breakfast, but some contest the positive implications of its \"most important\" status. The influence of breakfast on managing body weight is unclear.\n\nBreakfast in Africa varies greatly from region to region.\n\nMost Egyptians begin the day with a light breakfast. Ful medames (dish of cooked fava beans), one of Egypt's several national dishes, is typical. It is seasoned with salt and cumin, garnished with vegetable oil and optionally with tahini, chopped parsley, chopped tomato, garlic, onion, lemon juice, chili pepper and often served topped with a boiled egg. It is scooped up and eaten with the staple whole wheat pita bread called \"Eish Masri\" or \"Eish Baladi\" (Egyptian Arabic: ; Modern Standard Arabic: ') and usually accompanied by \"taʿamiya\" () which is the local variant of falafel made with fava beans, fresh cut homemade French fries and various fresh or pickled vegetables (called torshi). Several kinds of cheeses are popular, including ' or Domyati cheese, \"\" (Roman cheese) which is similar to \"Pecorino Romano\" or \"Manchego\", and Istanbuli cheese (a brined white cheese with peppers added to the brine which makes it spicy). Fried eggs with pastirma is also common breakfast foods in Egypt.\n\nFor breakfast, many Moroccans eat bread, harsha (semolina griddle cakes), or msemen (oiled pancakes) with olive oil, tea, and different kinds of Moroccan crepes.\n\nNigeria has over 250 different ethnic groups, with a corresponding variety of cuisines. For the Hausa of northern Nigeria, a typical breakfast consists of \"kosai\" (cakes made from ground beans which are then fried) or \"funkaso\" (wheat flour soaked for a day then fried and served with sugar). Both of these cakes can be served with porridge and sugar known as \"koko\". For the south western Yoruba people (Ilé Yorùbá) one of the most common breakfasts is \"Ògì\"— a porridge made from corn, usually served with evaporated milk. Ògì is eaten with \"Acarajé\" (akara) or \"Moi moi\". Both are made from ground bean paste; akara is fried in oil, and moi moi is wrapped in leaves or foil and then steamed. Ògì can also be steamed in leaves to harden it and eaten with akara or moi moi for breakfast. English tea or is served as a breakfast drink. Another popular option in southwest Nigeria is \"Gari\", which is eaten like a cereal. \"Gari\", known in Brazil as \"farofa\", is made from the root of \"cassava\". For breakfast, it is soaked in water and sweetened with sugar.\n\nBreakfast typically consists of café Touba, spiced coffee with abundant sugar sometimes consumed with dried milk, or kinkeliba tea. Small \"beignets\" and fresh fruit, including mangoes and bananas, are often part of a simple breakfast, and are accompanied by \"baguette\" with various spreads: Chocoleca, a Nutella equivalent made from peanuts; butter; or processed mild cheese.\n\nBreakfast (quraac) is an important meal for Somalis, who often start the day with some style of tea (\"shaah\"). The main dish is typically a pancake-like bread (\"canjeero\", \"canjeelo\"). It might also be eaten with a stew or soup (maraq). \"Lahoh\" is a pancake-like bread originating in Somalia, Djibouti and Yemen. It is often eaten along with honey and ghee or beef jerky (\"muqmad\"), and washed down with a cup of tea. During lunch, lahoh is sometimes consumed with soup or stew.\n\nLablabi is a common and popular breakfast stew.\n\nIn Uganda, most tribes have different cuisines but the most popular breakfast dishes are Porridge and Katogo. Porridge is made by mixing maize flour or millet flour with water and bringing the mixture to a boil. While Katogo is made from matoke (green bananas), peeled and cooked in the same pot with a sauce (Beef, peanuts, beans or greens), Katogo is served with tea or juice. Both dishes are popular in all regions of Uganda.\n\nBreakfasts vary widely throughout Asia. In Arab countries, breakfast is often a quick meal, consisting of bread and dairy products, with tea and sometimes jam. Flat bread with olive oil and \"za'tar\" is also popular.\n\nAs mainland China is made up of many distinct provinces, each with their own unique cuisine, breakfast in China can vary significantly from province to province. In general, basic choices include sweet or salty pancakes, soup, deep-fried bread sticks or doughnuts (youtiao), buns (mantou), porridge (congee), and fried or soup-based noodles. These options are often accompanied by tea or sweetened soybean milk. However, condiments for porridge and the soup base tend to vary between provinces and regions. The types of teas that are served and spices that are used can also differ significantly between the provinces.\n\nDue to its near two centuries history as a British colony and proximity to China's Canton region, both English and traditional Cantonese style breakfasts are of somewhat equal popularity in Hong Kong, as well as the hybrid form of breakfast commonly offered in Cha chaan teng. Cha Chaan Teng breakfasts often include Hong Kong-style milk tea, pan fried egg, bread, Cantonese noodles or Hong Kong style macaroni in soup. Traditional Cantonese breakfast may include dim sum, which include a variety of different ingredients and are prepared in numerous different forms from delicately wrapped baby shrimp steamed dumplings to sweet water chestnut cake. Each dish is designed to be sampled and diners can go through a large selection of dim sum quickly accompanied by a generous amount of good tea. \"Tieguanyin\" is the most common accompaniment, but other teas such as \"pu'er\" and \"oolong\" are also common. Fried and rice-based noodles and cakes are also popular. In modern times, dim sum is commonly prepared and served in Yum Cha restaurants rather than at home because of the skill and efforts involved in the preparation.\n\nThe typical Bangladeshi breakfast consists of flour-based flat breads such as chapati, roti or paratha, served with a curry. Usually the curry can be vegetable, home-fried potatoes or scrambled eggs. The breakfast varies according to location and the eater's income. In villages and rural areas, rice is mostly preferred by day labourers. In the city, sliced bread with jam or jelly is chosen due to time efficiency. In Bangladesh tea is preferred to coffee, and is an essential part of most breakfasts. Having toasted biscuits, bread or puffed rice with tea is also very popular.\n\nIn all, there are at least 25 types of Indian breakfasts, each consisting of a choice of over 100 different food items. Each state in India has different specialties and items for breakfast. Thus there is no single standard Indian breakfast, with items changing with regions. However, one can broadly classify breakfast varieties in India into two types: North Indian and South Indian. The eastern and western parts of India also have individual breakfast items unique to their cultures and states.\n\nA typical south Indian breakfast consists of idli, vada or dosa coupled with chutney and sambar. Many variations of these dishes exist such as rava idli, thayir vadai (yogurt vada), sambar vada and masala dosa. Other popular south Indian breakfast items are pongal, bisibelebath (sambar rice), upma, and poori. The state of Kerala has some special breakfast items such as appam, parotta, puttu, idiyappam and palappam.\n\nA typical north Indian breakfast may either be a type of paratha or roti served with a vegetable curry, curd and pickles. There are several varieties of parathas available depending on the type of stuffing such as aloo paratha, paneer (cottage cheese) paratha, mooli paratha (radish paratha), etc.\nOther popular breakfast items in the north are poori bhaji, poha and bhindi bhujia.\n\nAmong Bengals roti and curry are the general variants in breakfast. The menu may also include \"Indian French toast\" which is also known as \"Bombay toast\", chire bhaja (flaked rice fried in oil with salt added to taste), and boiled eggs.\n\nIn Western India, a Gujarati household may serve dhoklas, khakhras or theplas for breakfast, the most popular of which is methi thepla. In Mangalore the breakfast dish oondees may be served. In Maharashtra, the typical breakfast (\"nashta\") consists of kande pohe, upma, ukkad, and thalipeeth. Sometimes chapati bhaji or a chapati roll with tea becomes breakfast.\n\nBreakfast in Iran generally consists of different kinds of flatbread such as barbari, taftoon, sangak, lavash, white cheese, butter, jam and marmalade (morabba), honey, clotted cream (sar sheer), nuts and fresh/dried fruits, and black tea or coffee. Frequently breakfast can be as simple as butter and jam on bread with tea. Iranians prefer to drink their hot black tea with sugar. Traditional cooked dishes for breakfast include haleem (wheat and chicken/lamb/turkey porridge eaten with cinnamon) or kale pache (sheep's feet, stomach and other offal), adasi (green lentil soup), fried/boiled/soft-boiled eggs, \"omlet\" (eggs cooked in tomato sauce).\n\nThe Israeli breakfast is a mix of culinary influences from eastern Europe, agrarian Yishuv culture, North African cuisine and Levantine cuisine. It usually consists of a range of cheeses along with sliced vegetables, scrambled eggs (or another kind of fried egg)\n\nIsraeli hotels usually present this type of breakfast as a buffet. Restaurants may prefer a pre-set \"Israeli Breakfast\" menu item.\n\nBreakfast in modern Japanese households comes in two major variations: Japanese style and Western style. Japanese-style breakfasts are eaten widely in Japan, but often only on weekends and non-working days. Younger Japanese couples may prefer Western-style breakfasts because they are generally less time consuming to prepare. The standard Japanese breakfast consists of steamed white rice, a bowl of miso soup, and Japanese styled pickles (like \"takuan\" or \"umeboshi\"). A raw egg and nori are often served; the raw egg is beaten in a small bowl and poured on the hot rice to make golden colored \"tamago kake gohan\", whilst the \"nori\" (sheets of dried seaweed) is used to wrap rice. Grilled fish and Japanese green tea are often served as well.\n\nWestern-style breakfasts in Japanese households are similar to those in the United States. Japanese children often eat corn flakes and drink milk, hot chocolate or fruit juice. Japanese adults (especially younger ones) tend to have toast with butter or jam, eggs, and slices of vegetables. They often drink coffee or orange juice. Traditional Japanese inns (like \"ryokan\") serve complete traditional breakfast. Western-style hotels and restaurants in Japan generally offer a mix of the Western and Japanese styles.\n\nSee also: breakfast in Japan\n\nTraditionally, Korean breakfasts consist mainly of rice and soup dishes. These can include small amounts of fish or beef, and some form of broth, stew or porridge. Like all Korean meals, breakfast is usually served with \"banchan\", or side dishes consisting of \"kimchi\", \"Gyeran-jjim\" (steamed eggs) and tofu.\n\nIn Burma the traditional breakfast is \"htamin jaw\", fried rice with boiled peas (\"pè byouk\"), and \"yei nway jan\" (green tea), especially among the poor. Glutinous rice or \"kao hnyin\" is steamed and wrapped in banana leaf often served with peas as \"kao hnyin baung\" with a sprinkle of crushed and salted toasted sesame. Equally popular is the purple variety of rice known as \"nga cheik\" which is cooked the same way and called \"nga cheik paung\". \"Si damin\" is sticky rice cooked with turmeric and onions in peanut oil which is served with crushed and salted toasted sesame and crisp fried onions. Assorted fritters such as \"baya jaw\" (\"urad dal\") are often served as a complement.\n\n\"Nan bya\" or \"naan\" (Indian-style flatbreads) again with \"pè byouk\" or simply buttered, is served with Indian tea or coffee. It goes well with \"hseiksoup\" (mutton soup). Fried \"chapati\", blistered like \"nan bya\" but crispy, with \"pè byouk\" and crispy fried onions is a popular alternative. \"Htat ta ya\", lit. \"a hundred layers\", is flaky multi-layered fried \"paratha\" served with either \"pè byouk\" or a sprinkle of sugar. \"Eeja gway\" (Chinese-style fried breadsticks or \"youtiao\") with Indian tea or coffee is another favourite. \"Mohinga\", perhaps the most popular of all, now available as an \"all-day breakfast\" in many towns and cities, is rice vermicelli in fish broth kept on the boil with chickpea flour or crushed toasted rice, lemon grass, sliced banana stem, onions, garlic, ginger, pepper and fish paste and served with crispy fried onions, crushed dried chilli, coriander, fish sauce and lime. Add fritters such as split chickpea (\"pè jan jaw\"), urad dal (\"baya jaw\") or gourd (\"bu jaw\"), boiled egg and fried fish cake (\"nga hpè jaw\").\n\nA typical Filipino breakfast usually includes fried egg, either scrambled or sunny side-up, tocino, dried fish called tuyo, tapa, and fried rice, usually seasoned with garlic. They are usually served at seven in the morning due to school classes starting relatively early. If main breakfast is not cooked or is unavailable, a bread called pandesal is eaten instead, with cheese, peanut butter, jam, or kesong puti as spread.\n\nA traditional Singaporean breakfast contains kaya toast (coconut milk jam with bread), half-boiled eggs and Kopi. Locals usually dip the toast into the eggs mixed with soya sauce and pepper.\n\nIn Turkish cuisine, a typical breakfast consists of bread, cheese (\"beyaz peynir\", \"kaşar\" etc.), butter, olives, eggs, tomatoes, cucumbers, jam, honey, and kaymak. \"Sucuk\" (spicy Turkish sausage), \"pastırma\", \"börek\", \"simit\", \"poğaça\" and soups are eaten as a morning meal in Turkey. A common Turkish specialty for breakfast is called \"menemen\", which is prepared with tomatoes, green peppers, onion, olive oil and eggs. Various soups (çorba) are also very common and traditional for Turkish breakfast; mainly chicken broth, lentil soup, and a national delicacy, \"tarhana\" soup (Turkish cereal food consisting of flour yogurt and vegetables fermented then dried; it is consumed as a soup by mixing it with stock or water) are most well known soups. Tripe soup, trotter soup, sheep's head soup are also traditionally very common all over Turkey for breakfast. The Turkish word for breakfast, \"kahvaltı\", means \"before coffee,\" (\"kahve\", 'coffee'; \"altı\", 'under'). but since after the First World War, during which the Ottoman Empire lost its coffee-producing territories, tea has displaced coffee as the everyday hot drink in Turkey.\nIn Sirkeci district of Istanbul, Pide is a popular morning meal.\n\nPrior to the Second World War and the widespread adoption of household refrigerators, the traditional Australian breakfast consisted of grilled steaks and fried eggs, mainly because of the ready availability of beefsteak during that period. Although this is still eaten in the bush, very few urban Australians today would recall this breakfast format.\n\nThe majority of urban Australians eat commercially prepared cereal with pasteurised milk or yogurt and toast with preserves such as marmalade or vegemite for breakfast. Two of the most common cereals are cornflakes and a type of biscuit made from compressed toasted flakes of wheat, called Weet-bix. Fruit is also common at breakfast, either on the cereal or eaten separately. While not unusual, a cooked breakfast is more likely to be eaten on weekends or on special occasions either at home or at a café. A cooked breakfast can include sausage, bacon, breakfast steaks, mushrooms, tomato, hash browns and pancakes, similar to both the British and American cooked breakfast. Breakfast habits differ more between age groups or families than between cities.\n\nIn ethnically Fijian villages, breakfast may be tea served with milk and sugar, and food made out of flour: \"tovoi\" or \"babakau\" (a type of fried dough), pancakes, bread or biscuits with butter. Sometimes a starch, such as cassava, taro in coconut milk, or rice, is served instead. Leftover fish or meat from the previous night's meal may be served as well. Tea made from lemon leaves (called \"draunimoli\") and fruits such as pineapple, banana, papaya, plantain, and watermelon are also occasionally served. In urban households, tea and cereals are often consumed. Breakfast foods eaten by Fiji Indians often include a vegetable curry with roti and sometimes differ from the above. Fijians living in Rotuma sometimes eat \"nuqa\" fish in \"tarotaro\" (fermented coconut yogurt), with fresh tropical fruits.\n\nBreakfast in New Zealand is very similar to the Australian breakfast. The range of processed breakfast cereals is vast and children are more likely to eat those that contain added sugar. New Zealanders, particularly in winter, are likely to eat a hot oat cereal called \"porridge\". Porridge is typically served with milk, sugar, fruit or yogurt. Sliced bread which has been toasted and topped with preserves or spreads is a common alternative breakfast. Eating breakfast at a restaurant was unheard of until the 1990s; however cafes which serve breakfast until midday or all day are now common. The Big Breakfast is the main item at cafes, which is similar to the British cooked breakfast, except that it seldom includes black pudding. Other common menu items are: eggs done how you like, eggs benedict, beans on toast, pancakes, cereal and yogurt, and smoothies. Breakfast nearly always includes coffee, tea or both, with children drinking milk either on their cereal, in a glass or hot milo. Recent concern has been raised about the cost of milk and some families being unable to afford it.\n\nA fast food franchise, McDonald's New Zealand offers a \"kiwi big breakfast\" which includes two sausages, hash brown, scrambled eggs, toasted muffin and choice of a small Filter coffee, Hot chocolate or tea. Some NGOs and charities, such as the New Zealand Red Cross, provide breakfast to underclass primary school children. Survey results released in 2013 claim that nearly half of all New Zealanders skip breakfast at least once a week with almost a third of those skipping breakfast up to three times a week.\n\nAccording to Merriam-Webster, a continental breakfast usually includes coffee, jam, fruit, and baked goods such as bread and pastries, items chosen because they are shelf-stable, and can be served in portion sizes that are appropriate for large groups of people. The term originated in Britain in the mid-19th century, first used in 1896 public hygiene book \"The Sanitarian\", in which \"continent\" refers to the countries of mainland Europe, though the idea had been around for a few decades as American hotels endeavored to appeal to the changing tastes of the emerging middle class and European travelers visiting America. The term refers to the type of breakfast found in places such as France and the Mediterranean, which is lighter and more delicate than the typical full English breakfast, which tends to consist of a large plate of eggs, bacon, sausage, toast, beans, and roasted mushrooms and tomatoes, and American breakfasts featuring eggs, breakfast meats, pancakes, potatoes, and toast. Continental breakfasts are also more cost-effective for the establishments serving them, because they require less staff to prepare them.\n\nIn southeast Europe, in countries such as Bulgaria, Bosnia, Montenegro, Macedonia and parts of Croatia breakfast usually consists of various kinds of savory or sweet pastry, with cheese, meat or jam filling. The most typical breakfast consists of two slices of burek and a glass of yogurt. Breakfast also often consists of open sandwiches. The sandwich is buttered (with margarine), with toppings such as prosciutto and yellow cheese.\n\nIn Albania the breakfast often consists of a scone, milk, tea, eggs, jam or cheese. Meat is not preferred during the breakfast and it is usually substituted for seafood such as canned sardines or tuna which is typically served with condiments such as mustard or mayonnaise. Wholegrain cereals and pastries are mostly consumed by children. A shot of raki may be added to coffee as in the Italian \"Caffè corretto\".\n\nIn Croatia the base is a continental breakfast with a variety of pastries with or without fillings (marmalade, chocolate, cheese, ham, nuts, poppy) and fermented milk products (yogurt, soured milk, soured cream). Cold cuts, such as prosciutto, ham, salami, kulen, bacon, and various cheeses, are also favored. Fried eggs or omelet and Vienna sausage with mayonnaise, mustard or ajvar are very often consumed. In continental parts \"sir i vrhnje\" (cottage cheese with soured cream and some spices) is traditional. Coffee is much preferred over tea (mostly herbal tea).\n\nA typical breakfast in Denmark consists of slices of rye bread ('rugbrød') with yellow cheese, a soft-boiled egg – or more rarely – ham, salami or liver spread ('leverpostej') or it may consist of breakfast cereals such as oatmeal, corn flakes, yogurt being popular options. White bread or bread rolls (\"rundstykker\") with yellow cheese and different kinds of jams, usually made from berries or citrus fruits, and other toppings, accompanied by coffee, or tea.\nWeekends or festive occasions may call for Danish pastries (\"wienerbrød\"), chocolate, or a bitters, such as Gammel Dansk.\n\nBreakfast usually consists of coffee or tea with open sandwiches. The sandwich is often buttered (with margarine), with toppings such as hard cheese or cold cuts. Finns usually do not have sweets on their breads such as jam, or chocolate. Sour milk products such as yogurt or viili are also common breakfast foods, usually served in a bowl with cereals such as corn flakes, muesli, and sometimes with sugar, fruit or jam. Oatmeal or mixed grain porridge may also be served, usually topped with butter.\n\nIn France, a typical domestic breakfast consists of a cup of coffee, often café au lait, or hot chocolate, sometimes accompanied by a glass of orange or grapefruit juice. The main food consists of sweet products such as \"tartines\" (slices of baguette or other breads spread with butter, jam or chocolate paste), sometimes dunked in the hot drink. Brioches and other pastries such as \"croissants\", \"pains au chocolat (chocolatine)\" and \"pains aux raisins\" are also traditional, but more of a weekend special treat. Other products such as breakfast cereals, fruit compote, fromage blanc, and yogurt are becoming increasingly common as part of the meal. A traditional French breakfast does not include any savory product, but breakfast buffets in hotels often include ham, cheese and eggs.\n\nThe typical German breakfast consists of bread or bread rolls, butter, jam, ham, cheeses, meat spreads, cold cuts, hard- or soft-boiled eggs and coffee or tea. Cereals have become popular, and regional variation is significant. Yogurt, granola and fruit (fresh or stewed) may appear, as well as eggs cooked to order (usually at smaller hotels or bed-and-breakfasts). A second breakfast is traditional in parts of Germany, notably Bavaria where it is called \"Brotzeit\" (literally \"bread time\").\n\nHome breakfasts in Greece include bread with butter, honey or marmalade with coffee or milk. Breakfast cereals are also eaten. Children also eat Nutella type cream on bread. No breakfast at all is common. Various kinds of savoury pastry (Tyropita, spanakopita, and bougatsa) are also eaten for breakfast, also by those eating out, usually accompanied with Greek coffee or Frappé coffee.\nTraditional Greek breakfast (hot milk, fresh bread, butter and honey, or yogurt) was also available in special \"milk shops\" (in Greek Galaktopoleia – Γαλακτοπωλεία γαλακτοπωλείο). Milk shops were phased out between 1970 and 1990 – there are very few left, one is in Athens and some in small towns.\n\nIn Hungary people usually have a large breakfast. Hungarian breakfast generally is an open sandwich with fresh bread or a toast, butter, cheese or different cream cheeses, \"túró\" cheese or \"körözött\" (Liptauer cheese spread), cold cuts such as ham, liver pâté (called \"májkrém\" or \"kenőmájas\"), bacon, salami, beef tongue, mortadella, \"disznósajt\" (head cheese), different Hungarian sausages or kolbász. Even eggs (fried, scrambled or boiled), French toast called \"bundás kenyér\" and vegetables (like peppers, bell peppers, tomatoes, radish, scallion and cucumber) are part of the Hungarian breakfast. Sometimes breakfast is a cup of milk, tea or coffee with pastries, bread rolls or crescent-shaped bread (kifli), toast, pastries with different fillings (sweet and salty as well), butter, jam or honey and a bun or a strudel or cereal like muesli, yogurt, kefir and perhaps fruit.\n\nThe traditional breakfast in Italy simply consists of a caffè latte (hot coffee with milk) with bread or rolls, butter and jam – known as \"prima colazione\" or just \"colazione\". \"Fette biscottate\" (a cookie-like hard bread often eaten with hazelnut chocolate spread or butter and jam) and biscotti (cookies) are commonly eaten. Hot coffee may be sometimes replaced by hot tea, depending on personal taste. Children often drink hot chocolate, plain milk, hot milk with barley coffee, or hot milk with very little coffee. Cereals, yogurt and fruit juices are also common. If breakfast is eaten in a \"bar\" (coffee shop), it is composed of \"cappuccino\" and \"cornetto\" (frothed hot milk with coffee, and a pastry).\n\nTypical Latvian breakfast usually consists of open sandwiches with toppings made of vegetables, fish, eggs or cheese. Just like Finland it is often buttered with margarine. Curd mixed with vegetables and salt as well as other sour milk products are very popular as well. Very often light oat porridge is eaten too. In general light, sour and salty tasting food is common for morning meal. Latvians usually drink coffee for breakfast.\n\nOn the island of Malta, breakfast integrates both British and continental elements. Usually the Maltese start their day with a bowl of cereal mixed with milk, sometimes with a cup of coffee or tea. Marmalade/jams or even chocolate spreads are also common on bread or toast. Today cereal bars are also becoming a common type of breakfast on the island. The traditional English breakfast of eggs, sausages and fried bacon was also popular among the Maltese, especially on Sundays, due to the strong British influence on the island but this has diminished almost completely, as locals have rediscovered a more Mediterranean and continental diet over the recent years. Hotels usually serve both a continental as well as a full English breakfast. Prayers are often said before breakfast in order to bless the meal.\n\nFor breakfast, the Dutch and Belgians typically eat sliced bread with butter or margarine and various choices of toppings: dairy products (numerous variations of cheese), a variety of cured and sliced meats, or sweet or semi-sweet products such as jam, syrup (from sugar beets or fruit), honey, Kokosbrood (a coconut product that is served thinly sliced like sliced cheese) or peanut butter. Another type of sweet toppings are the chocolate toppings; the Dutch have chocolate toppings in all variations: \"hagelslag\" (chocolate sprinkles), \"chocoladevlokken\" (chocolate flakes) (both typically Dutch), and \"chocoladepasta \"(chocolate spread). Tea, dripolator coffee, milk, and juice are the most popular breakfast beverages. Breakfast may also include raisin bread and fried or boiled eggs. On special occasions, such as Easter, Christmas, Mother's Day etc., breakfast is usually the same, but with a wider range of choices (i.e. premium cheeses, special ham, hot buns, croissants etc.).\n\nA 2012 opinion poll concluded that the Dutch believe that breakfast should be a more important meal than it is and that more time should be spent on it; almost three-quarters of those polled ate their sandwiches in less than fifteen minutes, and blame for an all-too quick breakfast was placed on \"fast\" breakfast products. A perfect \"weekend breakfast\" for the Dutch contained coffee or tea, fresh-baked bread rolls (and croissants), and a boiled egg. The poll also concluded that men are more interested than women in having breakfast with their partner.\n\n80% of Norwegians eat breakfast (\"frokost\") daily, mostly at home. The most common breakfast is open sandwiches (\"smørbrød\"), often whole wheat bread, with cheese, often Jarlsberg, Norvegia or brunost, cold cuts, leverpostei, jam etc. Common drinks are water, various types of coffee such as French press, cafe latte or espresso, milk and juice. Another common breakfast is breakfast cereals like corn flakes eaten with milk, kulturmelk or yogurt. Whole-grain porridges with regular milk or butter are also eaten by some. More ample breakfasts may include fish, a diverse array of cheese, eggs, bacon, breads, and hot and cold cereals eaten in various combinations. Pastries such as croissants or \"pain au chocolat\" have become increasingly common since the 1990s.\n\nThe traditional Polish breakfast is a large spread with a variety of sides eaten with bread or toast. Sides include various cold cuts, meat spreads, the Polish sausage kielbasa, tomatoes, Swiss cheese, and sliced pickles. \"Twaróg,\" a Polish cheese, is the breakfast classic and comes in many forms. \"Twaróg\" can be eaten plain, with salt, sugar, or honey, or it can be mixed with chives into a cream cheese-like spread. Eggs are served often as the main breakfast item, mostly soft-boiled or scrambled. For a quick winter breakfast, hot oatmeal, to which cocoa is sometimes added, is often served. Jam spreads are popular for a quick breakfast, including plum, raspberry, and black or red currant spreads. Breakfast drinks include coffee, milk, hot cocoa, or tea. Traditionally, the Poles avoid heavy-cooked foods for breakfast. For the most part, one will not see fried meats or potatoes in a classic Polish breakfast. Emphasis is placed on a large variety of foods to satisfy everyone at the breakfast table.\n\nThe traditional Romanian breakfast is milk, tea or coffee alongside (toasted) bread with butter or margarine and on top of it, honey or fruit jams or preserves. Sometimes the buttered bread is served savory instead of sweet, in which case the Romanians add cured meats, salami or cheese. Another option is to spread on a slice of bread some liver pâté. In recent years, Romanians have also started to serve cereal with dried fruits and milk instead of the traditional breakfast, though that is not yet very widespread. According to a 2014 study, 35% of Romanians eat cooked dishes such as omelet or fried eggs and 15% eat sandwiches. Most people drink coffee and 67% serve Turkish coffee (made in an ibrik), though more and more people are starting to use drip or filter coffee. While crêpes served with fruit preserves, jams or cheese have traditionally been served as desserts, in the recent years more Romanians have started to have them as breakfast during weekends.\n\nTraditional Russian breakfast are concentrated on kashas, or porridges – the most important staple in Russian nutritional culture, with buckwheat and oat, as well as semolina, serving as the three most important bases of such dishes, usually cooked on water or milk, as well as consumed with or without milk. Breakfast foods also include pancakes or oladushki. Oladushki are made from flour and rise on yeast. Blini, or crepes, are also popular for breakfast and are also made with flour, but without the yeast. Sirniki, is a cheese form of pancake. Sirniki are made of tvorog (quark cheese), which can be eaten separately with honey for breakfast. Also, a popular dish is buterbrod, open sandwiches with cold cuts and cheeses.\n\nIn Serbia, breakfast may include eggs in different forms (e.g. omelet with bacon, onion and feta cheese), canned fish or opened sandwiches with prosciutto or ham, feta cheese and salad (e.g. pickles). Different types of pies and pastry with various filings (e.g. proja, gibanica, burek) are also served as the main dish. Yogurt and coffee are preferred breakfast drinks.\n\nIn Central Spain there is a special breakfast 'known as \"chocolate con churros\" – hot chocolate with Spanish-style fritters, which are extruded sticks of doughnut-like dough with a star-shaped profile covered in sugar. The chocolate drink is made very thick and sweet. In Madrid, \"churros\" are somewhat smaller and shaped like a charity ribbon. This meal is normally served in cafeterías but it is not a regular or usual breakfast at Madrid homes. The usual one is the same as in the rest of Spain: coffee with milk or Cola Cao, orange juice, biscuits or toasts, with butter and jam.\n\nIn the North, East and West it is more common to have a cup of coffee (usually with milk) or Cola Cao and a toast with a choice of olive oil and salt, tomato and olive oil, butter, jam, pâté, \"jamón serrano\" (cured ham), and other options like \"sobrasada\" (a raw cured spiced sausage that is easy to spread), and in Andalucia, \"pringá\". Freshly squeezed orange juice is widely available in most places as an alternative for coffee. The breakfast is not often larger than these two items, because usually in late morning there is a break known as \"almuerzo\" when there is a snack. Sometimes, toast is replaced with \"galletas\" (a type of cookie made with flour, sugar, oil and vanilla flavour), \"magdalenas\" (a Spanish version of the French madeleine made with oil instead of butter) or buns.\n\nBreakfast in Sweden is usually an open sandwich of soft bread or crisp bread, cold cuts, smörgåskaviar, cheese, cottage cheese, cream cheese, eggs, scrambled or boiled, pâté (leverpastej) with pickled cucumber, tomatoes or cucumber, or a toast with marmalade or maybe honey, juices, coffee, hot chocolate or tea. Breakfast cereals or muesli with milk, yogurt or filmjölk, currants and fruits are popular or warm whole-grain porridge with milk and jam (for example lingonberry jam). Bilberry-soup (blåbärssoppa) and rose hip soup are also possible breakfast alternatives.\n\nSwiss breakfasts are often similar to those eaten in neighboring countries. Traditionally, zopf (or züpfe) is eaten on Sunday mornings and New Year's Day. A notable breakfast food of Swiss origin, now found throughout Europe, is muesli, (\"Birchermüesli\" in Swiss German), introduced in 1900 by Maximilian Bircher-Benner for patients in his hospital.\n\nIn the contemporary UK and Ireland, a weekday breakfast may involve a cereal dish, such as muesli, porridge or cereal, or toast or simply bread spread with jam or marmalade. Tea and coffee remain equally popular accompaniments. Marmalade, originally a Portuguese confection, had been a popular British spread to consume in the evening, before the Scots moved it to the breakfast table in the 18th century. It is however becoming very common to 'skip breakfast' entirely or take coffee or pastries on the morning commute. Portable quick snacks such as granola bars, ready-cut fruit and warm takeaway foods are becoming increasingly commonly consumed away from home and are sold at commuting points and newsagents and local shops in all urban areas.\n\nThe traditional breakfast most associated with Britain and Ireland remains, however, the \"full breakfast\" of eggs (fried, scrambled, or poached) with bacon and sausages, usually with mushrooms, tomatoes, baked beans, fried bread, black pudding or white pudding and toast. Dating from a time when hard labour was more common, calorie intakes were necessarily higher, and servant labour was more available, it is nowadays regarded as a meal for the weekend or holidays when time is available for preparation, prepared by parents to welcome children, or as a special occasion such as a birthday or anniversary, or following a night of drinking. A healthy and nutritious version consists of grilling the protein and using poached, rather than fried, eggs, and variations based on one egg, one protein and toast abound. It remains by far the most common choice on brunch menus and breakfast cafes across the region. The \"full Scottish breakfast\" tends to omit pork sausages and have beef sausages or lamb haggis instead. At its most extensive it consists of eggs, square sausage, fried dumpling, potato scone, tomato, mushrooms, bacon beef links and fried bread. Originating in the British isles during the Victorian era, the full breakfast is among the most internationally recognised British dishes.\n\nAnother traditional British breakfast consists of porridge, although now associated with Scotland, it has been consumed across Britain as a staple food since at least the Middle Ages. The breakfast cereal Scott's Porage Oats was produced in Glasgow in 1880. Before the arrival of American-style breakfast cereals in the early 20th century, dried bread soaked in hot milk or tea and porridge (boiled oats) was the common daily breakfast, while leftover vegetables (often, cabbage) and potatoes not eaten the night before were often served re-fried becoming 'bubble-and-squeak'; in Ireland the dish is known as colcannon. Traditionally, breakfast would be served with a small amount of fruit, such as a slice of orange, believed to prevent the onset of scurvy. Also traditional, but now less popular breakfasts included fish in the form of kippers (smoked herring) with poached egg and toast, and kedgeree (a Scoto-Indian smoked haddock, egg and rice dish originating in Colonial India). Most British breakfasts are consumed with tea, coffee or fruit juice.\n\nIn Old English, breakfast was known as \"morgenmete\", meaning \"morning meal\".\nA continental breakfast in UK and Irish hotels normally consists of baked goods (fresh bread, toast, pastries such as croissants or pain au chocolat etc.) slices of cheese and cold meat, cereal, yogurts, fruit and drinks like coffee, tea or fruit juices. Although this is the traditional breakfast in parts of continental Europe, elsewhere these breakfasts are common only in the hospitality sector (particularly in economy and limited service hotels with no restaurant, as they require little preparation).\n\nAs with other continents around the world, breakfasts in North America vary widely from country to country.\n\nBreakfast in Canada is similar to that of the US. Traditional breakfast foods include pork sausages or bacon, fried potatoes, eggs, toast, cereals, pancakes (or French toast) and maple syrup, or hot oatmeal. Coffee, tea and fruit juice of many varieties are widely consumed in Canada during breakfast.\n\nIn Costa Rica the most common breakfast is called \"gallo pinto,\" which basically is made up of rice and beans (red or black) previously cooked. Sautéed in a pan with chile, onions, culantro (an herb typical to the region) and bean stock for color. It is accompanied with fried egg, cheese and fried plantain or cooking plantain. Black coffee as well as with milk are traditional drinks. As this is the most common breakfast of the country, in Limón Province they prepare gallo pinto with coconut milk instead. Another popular breakfast food is the \"chorreadas\" which are basically savory sweet corn pancakes; they are usually accompanied with cheese or a type of sour cream called \"natilla\".\n\nBreakfast in urban areas traditionally consists of café con leche that is sweetened and includes a pinch of salt. Toasted buttered Cuban bread, cut into lengths, is dunked in the coffee. In rural Cuba, farmers eat roasted pork, beans and white rice, café con leche and cuajada sweetened with caramel.\n\nIn the Dominican Republic, breakfast varies depending on the region. In the interior of the island it is accustomed to have breakfast with a side\nof vegetables, the green plantain or cooking plantain being the most popular. It is served boiled or mashed known as Mangú.\nIn the capital, breakfast is more light. It includes coffee with milk or hot chocolate, along with bread, butter and cheese. Normally accompanied by orange juice and other juices of fruits typical to the region. Milk punch (milk, egg, nutmeg and malt) boiled eggs with \"harina de negrito\" or some other type of cornstarch. Traditional breakfast bread is a water-based bread.\n\nIn Guatemala, breakfast consists of one or two eggs either fried, scrambled or boiled accompanied by baked/fried beans with coffee. With this comes fresh cream, fresh cheese and fried plantains (or cooking plantain). It is common to add hot sauce made out of \"chiltepes\" (a type of pepper). They are prepared raw or boiled, then they are ground with some vinegar, chopped onions and chopped cilantro to make the hot sauce. A traditional egg dish prepared with both green and red sauces is called \"huevos divorciados.\"\nIn the eastern part of the country, specifically in Zacapa you can find \"huevos a caballo\" or (eggs on a horse) which is basically two fried eggs over roasted steak.\n\nOther types of breakfast include milk cereals. The most common drinks are orange juice or other fruits, milk, atol (a milk pudding with chocolate) and corn starch. The coffee is normally served with sweet bread also called \"pan de manteca\" (or butter bread).\n\nIn Honduras it is typical to start the day with homemade bread, with coffee or a glass of milk. Then, a plate of food with beans, alongside eggs that can be scrambled or sunny side up, slivers of fried plantain (or cooking plantain), corn, tortillas, cheese and butter. Versions of egg preparation vary: \"estrellados\" which consists of just cracking the shell, in \"torta\" or omelette (beaten with some salt), scrambled or boiled. Another typical breakfast are the baleadas and tortillas with cheese; sometimes they are fried together with cheese in between. In the \"garífuna\" culture, coffee is accompanied by \"mínimo\" bread (banana bread) or coconut bread.\n\nA Jamaican breakfast includes ackee and saltfish, seasoned callaloo, boiled green bananas, and fried dumplings.\n\nA traditional Mexican breakfast consists of eggs prepared in different ways (like Huevos rancheros), accompanied by beans with chile and tortillas. Also very traditional are chilaquiles (pieces of corn tortilla with a cheese and chile sauce) and entomatadas (a variation of the spicy enchiladas).\n\nIn Nicaragua the typical breakfast consists of \"gallo pinto\" (national dish made out of red beans and rice), eggs, cheese, corn tortillas and sweet plantains. Meals are normally accompanied by different juices and coffee. On Sundays, nacatamales are the traditional breakfast. These consist of a mass of corn with rice, potatoes, pork or chicken and sliced onions wrapped in plantain leaves and is usually accompanied by cacao as a drink.\n\nIn Panama, breakfast is a heavy meal, especially in the interior of the country where hard labor requires it. It always includes black coffee (tinto) or with milk (called pintado) with any of these sides: corn tortillas, traditional white cheese (or queso del pais), another type of tortillas or \"torrejas\" made of wheat flour known as \"hojaldres.\" Another traditional breakfast side is \"bollo\" made out of either corn, white corn, or coconut that is wrapped in corn leaves and \"preña'o\" (meaning with child) that means it's filled with some type of meat. \n\nAs protein, a large serving of beef liver with onion, scrambled or fried eggs, beef stew or \"tasajo\" (a type of beef jerky), pork rinds and different kinds of sausages like chorizo or \"morcilla\" are the most popular. These are also accompanied by: slices of green plantain or cooking plantain, \"patacones\" (double fried plantain), carimañolas (yuca filled with meat), as well as different bread pastries both savory and sweet.\nThese large breakfasts are normally reserved for special occasions while everyday breakfasts consist of more traditional food from the west like toast, ham, cheese, jam etc.\n\nIt is important to mention that the prolonged US presence has also influenced urban areas of Panama by introducing meals like cereal with milk as well as pancakes with syrup as traditional breakfast meals.\n\nThe average starting time for breakfasts in the United States has been found to be 8:12 a.m, and varies from 8:08 a.m. in the South to 8:17 a.m. in the West. Breakfast often consists of a combination of hot or cold cereals, eggs, breakfast meats, and breakfast quick breads such as pancakes, waffles, or biscuits. Variants of the full breakfast and continental breakfast are also common. In the Southeastern United States, grits, and biscuits and gravy are popularly eaten at breakfast. In many regions around the country, bagels are a common breakfast item, and are often served sliced in half, toasted, and spread with butter or cream cheese or other toppings. Another popular breakfast item in the United States are doughnuts, which are often consumed exclusive of other breakfast foods. Coffee is a common beverage, as is tea, and orange juice, tomato juice, and other fruit juices are consumed by people of all ages. In the United States, 65% of coffee is drunk during breakfast hours. Milk is also widely consumed, drunk either plain or prepared with various flavorings, such as chocolate or strawberry.\n\nAcross the country, breakfast sandwiches are a common choice for the first meal of the day. A typical sandwich is composed of egg, cheese, and cooked breakfast meat such as bacon or sausage, on a roll, although regional varietals are common. In New Jersey, bacon is often swapped out of the breakfast sandwich and replaced with a processed meat called pork roll (also known as Taylor Ham). Other areas alter the breakfast sandwich medium with regional favorites: in New York, bagels are popular, and in the South, biscuits. A variation is the breakfast burrito, which originates from Southwestern and Tex-Mex cuisines.\n\nIn Argentina, breakfast is simple: tostadas or medialunas, usually served with coffee and orange juice.\n\nBreakfast in Brazil tends to be lighter as \"Brazilians consider lunch to be a more important meal\". It is called \"Café da Manhã\" in Portuguese, which translates to “morning coffee”, and consists of a combination of bread, fruits, cheese, cereal, \"pão de queijo\", cakes, coffee, milk, and fruit juice. Regional differences also exist.\n"}
{"id": "69369", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=69369", "title": "Ovos moles", "text": "Ovos moles\n\nOvos Moles de Aveiro (\"soft eggs from Aveiro\", literally) is a local delicacy from Aveiro District, Portugal, made of egg yolks and sugar. This mixture is often put inside of small rice paper casings in nautical shapes, such as shells, or into communion wafers.\n\nIn 2008, it was designated a product with Protected Geographical Indication by the European Union.\n\n"}
{"id": "70261", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70261", "title": "Safeword", "text": "Safeword\n\nIn BDSM, a safeword is a code word, series of code words or other signal used by a person to communicate their physical or emotional state, typically when approaching, or crossing, a physical, emotional, or moral boundary. Some safewords are used to \"stop\" the scene outright, while others can communicate a willingness to continue, but at a reduced level of intensity. Safewords are usually agreed upon before playing a scene by all participants, and many organized BDSM groups have standard safewords that all members agree to use to avoid confusion at organized play events.\n\nThose who practise the more permissive philosophy of risk-aware consensual kink may abandon the use of safewords, especially those that practice forms of edgeplay or extreme forms of dominance and submission. In such cases, the choice to give up the use of safewords is a consensual act on the part of the bottom or submissive.\n"}
{"id": "70553", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70553", "title": "Ceviche", "text": "Ceviche\n\nCeviche, also cebiche, seviche or sebiche (), is a seafood dish typically made from fresh raw fish cured in citrus juices, such as lemon or lime, and spiced with \"ají\", chili peppers or other seasonings including chopped onions, salt, and cilantro. Because the dish is not cooked with heat, it must be prepared and consumed fresh to minimize the risk of food poisoning. Ceviche is usually accompanied by side dishes that complement its flavors, such as sweet potato, lettuce, corn, avocado or plantain. The dish is popular in the Pacific coastal regions of Latin America. Though the origin of ceviche is hotly debated, in Peru it is considered a national dish. \n\nThough archeological records suggest that something resembling ceviche may have been consumed in Peru nearly two thousand years ago, some historians believe the predecessor to the dish was brought to Peru by Moorish women from Granada, who accompanied the Spanish conquistadors and colonizers, and this dish eventually evolved into what is now considered ceviche. Peruvian chef Gastón Acurio further explains that the dominant position Lima held through four centuries as the capital of the Viceroyalty of Peru allowed for popular dishes such as ceviche to be brought to other Spanish colonies in the region, and in time they became a part of local cuisine by incorporating regional flavors and styles.\n\nCeviche is now a popular international dish prepared in a variety of ways throughout the Americas, reaching the United States in the 1980s. The greatest variety of ceviches are found in Ecuador, Colombia, Chile and Peru; but other distinctly unique styles can also be found in coastal Honduras, El Salvador, Belize, Guatemala, the United States, Mexico, Panama, and several other nations.\n\nThe origin of the name of the dish is also disputed. One hypothesis suggests the common Spanish word for the dish, \"cebiche\", has its origin in the Latin word \"cibus\", which translates to English as \"food\" Another hypothesis, supported by the Royal Spanish Academy, is that \"ceviche\" has the same etymology as \"escabeche\", which derives from Mozarabic \"izkebêch\", in turn descending from Andalusian Arabic \"assukkabáǧ\", which also derives from Classical Arabic \"sakbāj\" (), meaning meat cooked in vinegar). It is ultimately from the unattested Middle Persian *\"sikbāg\", from \"sik\" (\"vinegar\") and *\"bāg\" (\"soup\"), which also yielded the Persian word \"sekbā\" (, a soup made with meat and vinegar). Further hypotheses base the origin of the term on \"escabeche\", Spanish for pickle, or it is simply a variation of the word \"siwichi\", the traditional Quechua name for the dish.\n\nThe name of the dish may be spelled variously as \"cebiche\", \"ceviche\", \"seviche\" or \"sebiche\", but the more common spelling in Peru is ceviche with \"v” which is an alternative spelling accepted by the Royal Spanish Academy, the official institution responsible for regulating the Spanish language in Spain. Despite this, other local terms, such as \"cerbiche\" and \"serviche\", are still used as variations to name the dish.\n\nIn regard to its origin, various explanations are given. According to some historic sources from Peru, ceviche would have originated among the Moche, a coastal civilization that began to flourish in the area of current-day northern Peru nearly 2000 years ago. The Moche apparently used the fermented juice from the local banana passionfruit. Recent investigations further show, during the Inca Empire, fish were marinated with the use of \"chicha\", an Andean fermented beverage. Different chronicles also report, along the Peruvian coast prior to the arrival of Europeans, fish was consumed with salt and \"ají\". Furthermore, this theory proposes the natives simply switched to the citrus fruits brought by the Spanish colonists, but the main concepts of the plate remain essentially the same.\n\nThe invention of the dish is also attributed to places ranging from Central America to the Polynesian islands in the South Pacific. In Ecuador, it could have also had its origins with its coastal civilizations, as both Peru and Ecuador have shared cultural heritages (such as the Inca Empire) and a large variety of fish and shellfish. Ceviche is not native to Mexico, despite the fact that the dish has been a part of traditional Mexican coastal cuisine for centuries. The Spanish, who brought from Europe citrus fruits such as lime, could have originated the dish in Spain with roots in Moorish cuisine.\n\nNevertheless, most historians agree ceviche originated during colonial times in the area of present-day Peru. They propose the predecessor to the dish was brought to Peru by Moorish women from Granada who accompanied the Spaniards, and this dish eventually evolved into what nowadays is considered ceviche. Peruvian chef Gastón Acurio further explains the dominant position that Lima held through four centuries as the capital of the Viceroyalty of Peru allowed for popular dishes such as ceviche to be brought to other Spanish colonies in the region, and in time they became a part of local cuisine by incorporating regional flavors and styles. Other notable chefs who support the Peruvian origin of the plate include Chilean Christopher Carpentier and Spaniard Ferran Adrià, who in an interview stated, \"Cebiche was born in Peru, and so the authentic and genuine [cebiche] is Peruvian.\"\n\nCeviche is marinated in a citrus-based mixture, with lemons and limes being the most commonly used. In addition to adding flavor, the citric acid causes the proteins in the seafood to become denatured, appearing to be cooked. (However, acid marinades will not kill bacteria or parasitic worms, unlike the heat of cooking.) Traditional-style ceviche was marinated for about three hours. Modern-style ceviche, popularized in the 1970s, usually has a very short marinating period. With the appropriate fish, it can marinate in the time it takes to mix the ingredients, serve, and carry the ceviche to the table.\n\nMost Latin American countries have given ceviche its own touch of individuality by adding their own particular garnishes.\n\nIn Chile, ceviche is often made with fillets of halibut or Patagonian toothfish, and marinated in lime and grapefruit juices, as well as finely minced garlic and red chili peppers and often fresh mint and cilantro are added.\n\nIn Ecuador, the shrimp ceviche is sometimes made with tomato sauce for a tangy taste. The Manabí style, made with lime juice, salt and the juice provided by the cooked shrimp itself is very popular. Occasionally, ceviche is made with various types of local shellfish, such as black clam (cooked or raw), oysters (cooked or raw), spondylus (raw), barnacles (cooked percebes), among others mostly cooked. It is served in a bowl with toasted corn kernels as a side dish (fried green plantain chunks called \"patacones\", thinly sliced plantain chips called \"chifle\", and popcorn are also typical ceviche side dishes). In some regions, ceviche is served with rice on the side. Well cooked Sea bass (corvina), octopus, and crab ceviches are also common in Ecuador. In all ceviches, lime juice and salt are ubiquitous ingredients.\n\nIn Peru, ceviche has been declared to be part of the country's \"national heritage\" and has even had a holiday declared in its honor. The classic Peruvian ceviche is composed of chunks of raw fish, marinated in freshly squeezed key lime or bitter orange (\"naranja agria\") juice, with sliced onions, chili peppers, salt and pepper. Corvina or cebo (sea bass) was the fish traditionally used. The mixture was traditionally marinated for several hours and served at room temperature, with chunks of corn-on-the-cob, and slices of cooked sweet potato. Regional or contemporary variations include garlic, fish bone broth, minced Peruvian \"ají limo\", or the Andean chili \"rocoto\", toasted corn or \"cancha\" and \"yuyo\" (seaweed). A specialty of Trujillo is ceviche prepared from shark (\"tollo\" or \"tojo\"). \"Lenguado\" (sole) is often used in Lima. The modern version of Peruvian ceviche, which is similar to the method used in making Japanese sashimi, consists of fish marinated for a few minutes and served promptly. It was developed in the 1970s by Peruvian-Japanese chefs including Dario Matsufuji and Humberto Sato. Many Peruvian \"cevicherías\" serve a small glass of the marinade (as an appetizer) along with the fish, which is called \"leche de tigre\" or \"leche de pantera.\"\n\nIn Mexico and some parts Central America, it is served either in cocktail cups with tostadas, salted crackers, or as a tostada topping and taco filling. In Mexico, when served in a cup with tomato sauce, it is called a ceviche cocktail. Although this cocktail is made from the \"dry\" ceviche recipe, this presentation is rather unusual outside of some specific areas, and in most areas of Mexico the ceviche cocktail is very popular. Shrimp, octopus, squid, tuna, and mackerel are also popular bases for Mexican ceviche. The marinade ingredients include salt, lime, onion, chili peppers, avocado, and cilantro (known as coriander leaves outside of the Americas). Cut olives and a bit of tomatoes are often added to the preparation (ketchup is not used because it adds sugar and is not fresh).\n\nIn El Salvador and Nicaragua one popular ceviche recipe is \"ceviche de concha negra\" (\"black conch ceviche\"), known in Mexico as \"pata de mula\" (\"mule's foot\"). It is dark, nearly black, with a distinct look and flavor. It is prepared with lime juice, onion, yerba buena, salt, pepper, tomato, Worcestershire sauce, and sometimes picante (any kind of hot sauce or any kind of hot pepper) as desired.\n\nIn Nicaragua and Costa Rica, the dish includes marinated fish, lime juice, salt, ground black pepper, finely minced onions, coriander (cilantro) and finely minced peppers. It is usually served in a cocktail glass with a lettuce leaf and soda crackers on the side, as in Mexico. Popular condiments are tomato ketchup, mayonnaise, and tabasco sauce. The fish is typically tilapia or corvina, although mahi-mahi, shark and marlin are also popular.\n\nIn Panama, ceviche is prepared with lemon juice, chopped onion, celery, cilantro, assorted peppers, and sea salt. Ceviche de corvina (white sea bass) is very popular and is served as an appetizer in most local restaurants. It is also commonly prepared with octopus, shrimp, and squid, or served with little pastry shells called \"canastitas.\"\n\nIn Cuba, ceviche is often made using mahi-mahi prepared with lime juice, salt, onion, green pepper, habanero, and a touch of allspice. Squid and tuna are also popular. In Puerto Rico and other places in the Caribbean, the dish is prepared with coconut milk. In The Bahamas and south Florida, a conch ceviche known as 'conch salad' is very popular. It is prepared by marinating diced fresh conch in lime with chopped onions, celery, and bell pepper. Diced pequin pepper and/or scotch bonnet pepper is often added for spice. In south Florida, it is common to encounter a variation to which tomato juice has been added.\n\nIn the Philippines, \"kinilaw\" (or \"kilawin\") which use raw fish are usually referred to in English as \"Filipino ceviche\". However, this is inaccurate as \"kinilaw\" technically refers to an indigenous cooking process and thus not restricted to fish. Unlike Latin American ceviches, which primarily use citrus juices, \"kilawin\" instead primarily uses vinegar (usually coconut vinegar) and other acidic fruit juices. It is native to the Philippines, with archeological evidence dating back to the 10th to 13th century AD. It was also described by Spanish colonists and explorers to the Philippines, with the earliest mention being in the \"Vocabulario de la Lengua Tagala\" (1613) as \"cqinicqilao\" and \"cquilao\".\n\nFish \"kinilaw\" typically use \"tanigue\" (Spanish mackerels), \"malasugi\" (marlins or swordfish), and anchovies. The raw fish are cubed and then marinated in vinegar, souring agents (usually calamansi, but can also be other sour fruits), and salt and spices like black pepper, ginger, onions, and chili peppers (commonly \"siling labuyo\" or bird's eye chili). Variants can also use other ingredients, like shrimp, squid, clams, oysters, crabs, sea urchin roe, seaweed, shipworms (\"tamilok\"), vegetables, and cooked meat (usually goat meat, pork, beef, or chicken).\n\nIn the Northern Mariana Islands, \"kelaguen\", is another ceviche-type dish among the Chamorro people. It is derived from and closely resembles the Filipino \"kilawin\". It is believed to have originated from Filipino settlers during the Manila galleon trade in the Spanish period. Like the Filipino \"kilawin\", the Chamorro dish is also not restricted to fish or seafood, and can use cooked meat (commonly chicken or beef), but it is influenced by the Latin American version in that they exclusively use citrus juices. It is usually served with \"titiya\" (Chamorro tortillas) during fiestas.\n\nCeviche is usually very healthy. However, bad sanitary conditions during its preparation may lead to illness. Aside from contaminants, raw seafood can also be the vector for various pathogens, viral and bacterial, as well as larger parasitic creatures.\nAccording to the 2009 Food Code published by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and more recent studies, specific microbial hazards in ceviche include \"Anisakis simplex\", \"Diphyllobothrium\" spp., \"Pseudoterranova decipiens\" and \"Pseudoterranova cattani\", and \"Vibrio parahaemolyticus\". Anisakiasis is a zoonotic disease caused by the ingestion of larval nematodes in raw seafood dishes such as ceviche. The Latin American cholera outbreaks in the 1990s may have been attributed to the consumption of raw cholera-infested seafood that was eaten as ceviche.\n\nThe American Dietetic Association urges women to avoid ceviche during pregnancy.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "71026", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71026", "title": "Gutka", "text": "Gutka\n\nGutka or guṭkha is a chewing tobacco preparation made of crushed areca nut, tobacco, catechu, paraffin wax, slaked lime and sweet or savory flavorings, commonly used in some parts of India. It contains carcinogens, is considered responsible for oral cancer and other severe negative health effects and hence is subjected in India to the same restrictions and warnings as cigarettes.\n\nGutka is manufactured in the sub-continent and exported to a few other countries including United States, often marketed under the guise of a \"safer\" product than cigarettes and tobacco. A mild stimulant, it is sold across South Asia in small, individual-sized packets that cost between 2 and 10 rupees per packet. It is widely consumed in India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, and the Madhesh region of Nepal. Gutka is consumed by placing a pinch of it between the gum and cheek and gently sucking and chewing, similar to chewing tobacco. As with paan and other smokeless tobacco products, there are preventive efforts to encourage users to quit and young people not to start.\n\nGutka is a powdery, granular, light brownish to white substance. Within moments of chewing mixing with saliva, the gutkha begins to dissolve and turn deep red in color. It may impart upon its user a \"buzz\" somewhat more intense than that of tobacco chewing, snuffing and smoking. \n\nHighly addictive and a known carcinogen, gutkha is the subject of much controversy in India. Many states have sought to curb its immense popularity by taxing sales of gutkha heavily or by banning it outright.\n\nExcessive gutkha use can eventually lead to loss of appetite, promote unusual sleep patterns, and loss of concentration along with other tobacco-related problems. A gutkha user can easily be identified by prominently stained teeth ranging from yellowish-orange to reddish-black. The stains are difficult to remove by normal brushing and usually need the attention of a dentist . After gutkha is consumed, it is generally spat onto a wall or at the ground, causing a red stain that is quite resistant to the elements. Some building owners have taken to combating this by painting murals of gods on their walls, with the idea that gutkha chewers would not spit on a god.\n\nGutka is a combination of arecanut, slaked lime, paraffin and catechu along with tobacco. Promoted as a mouth freshener, this mixture is a combination of 4,000 chemicals of which at least 40 are carcinogenic compounds, say doctors.\n\nPeople get addicted to it as gutka is reported to have stimulant and relaxation effects. While most consumers believe that the blend is not harmful, doctors, especially oncologists, say consumption of gutka is more harmful than any other form of tobacco.\n\nThis is because when a person chews gutka, the mixture directly enters the system through the oral cavity. In the case of smoking, 20% of the harmful chemicals reach the lungs and 80% is exhaled.\n\nWhile narrowing of the blood vessels can cause gangrene, stoppage of blood supply in extreme cases can cause stroke. In women, consumption of gutka during pregnancy can result in low birth weight babies, he says.\n\n“Overall, people can develop cancers of mouth, throat, lung and oesophagus; heart disease and related ailments. While most youngsters get easily addicted to it, women are in the habit of chewing tobacco or even inhaling snuff, which is even more harmful,”\n\nGutkha use can begin at a very young age. Due to its often flavourful taste, easy availability and low price, it is popular with poor children, who can exhibit precancerous lesions at a very early age as a result. Symptoms of cancer often appear by high school or college age. Social custom does not permit children in India to smoke cigarettes, so gutkha use, being all but invisible to others, is the method of choice. Gutkha is also used by many as an alternative to cigarettes and is claimed to curb the need to smoke, but eventually becomes another habit tough to quit. Gutkha also causes swallowing problems during night time sleeping leading to dry throat and restless sleep. This may eventually lead to throat cancer in users..\nIn 2008, about 5 million children under 15 were addicted to gutkha. A survey in Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh found precursors of mouth cancers in 16% of the children.\n\nMany states of India have banned the sale, manufacture, distribution and storage of gutka and all its variants. As of May 2013, gutka is banned in 24 states and 3 union territories. The federal Food Safety and Regulation (Prohibition) Act 2011 allows harmful products such as gutka to be banned for a year. This can be renewed annually, resulting in a permanent ban. The ban is enforced by the state public health ministry, the state Food and Drug Administration, and the local police. Enforcement of the law is generally lax and many shops still sell gutka, although it may not be displayed. Enforcemnent is stricter in some regions like Mumbai and Delhi, but illegal sale of gutka still occurs.\n\nOffenders can be fined or receive prison sentences. The law has provisions of imposing fines up to 25,000 Indian rupees on the sale of products that are injurious to health.\n\nResearch firm Edelweiss estimates the gutka ban will cause the industry 15-20 billion rupees in losses.\n\nLike alcohol and tobacco products, there is a ban on advertisement of gutka. Often tobacco companies advertise gutka as pan masala in order to skirt the ban on advertising tobacco products. Surrogate advertisements often use pan masala ads to promote gutka products with similar name and packaging.\n\nAccording to the Food Safety and Standards (Prohibition and Restriction on Sales) Regulations, 2011 of the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India, misleading advertisement of such products invites a fine of 1,000,000 rupees.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "71030", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71030", "title": "Pa amb tomàquet", "text": "Pa amb tomàquet\n\nPa amb tomàquet (), or Pan con tomate (\"Bread with tomato\"), pa amb oli ( , \"Bread with olive oil\") is a traditional food of Valencian, Andalusian, Aragonian, Balearic, Catalan and Murcian cuisines in Spain. \"Pa amb tomàquet\" is considered a staple of Catalan cuisine and identity. \n\nIt consists of bread, which may or may not be toasted, with tomato rubbed over and seasoned with olive oil and salt. Sometimes, garlic is rubbed on the bread before rubbing in the tomato.\n\nIt is considered one of the typical examples that define the Mediterranean diet , extended as a traditional recipe throughout Catalonia. \nIt is popularly consumed on its own as a snack or a tapa with any meal, from breakfast to dinner.\n\nIn some Catalan restaurants, the tomato mixture is pre-made and is brushed on the bread, while others provide the guests with the ingredients to do the work themselves. The dish is served accompanied with any sorts of sausages (cured botifarres, xoriço, fuet, Iberian ham, etc.), ham, cheeses, omelettes, anchovies or other marinated fish, or grilled vegetables like escalivada.\n\nIn Majorca, \"pa amb oli\" is prepared with tomato called \"Tomàtiga de Ramellet\", a specific variety of tomatoes on the vine, smaller and with a taste that is slightly more intense and sour taste than normal tomatoes because of the loss of acidity in the tomato.\n\nThe original base used to be made with toasted slices of \"pa de pagès\" (\"peasants' bread\"), a typical round loaf of wheat bread of a fair size (from ½ kg to 5 kg, from some 20 cm to 50 cm in diameter).\n\nIf the mixture is not premade (in fact, if it is premade, most people will not consider it at all \"pa amb tomàquet\"), there is said to be an ideal order in which the ingredients are integrated to yield the best flavour. First, the garlic is rubbed on the bread. Then the same is done with the tomato. Next comes the salt, and lastly the olive oil.\n\nThe origin of this dish is disputed, as tomato is relatively new to Catalan cuisine (it came from America only after the 15th century). Widely regarded as the epitome of Catalan cuisine and identity, some sources claim it is actually a relatively recent (mid to late 19th century) in all the Mediterranean coast of Spain.\n\nCatalan chef Josep Lladonosa i Giró says it was first documented in the 18th century. The cook, born in 1938, remembers his grandmother explaining that her parents used to eat a dish called \"pa amb tomàquet\". With better precision, Catalan cooking historian Nèstor Luján says that the first written reference is from 1884 and, according to his thesis, the recipe would have been created in the rural world during an abundant tomato harvest. People would have used the tomatoes to soften hard and dry bread.\n\nThe dish shares some similarities with the tomato and olive oil-rubbed Ħobż biz-Zejt of Malta, with the Pan-bagnat of Nice, in the Provence region of France, the tomato-topped version of Italian bruschetta, and the Cretan meze dakos.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "71047", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71047", "title": "Escalivada", "text": "Escalivada\n\nEscalivada (), also sometimes transcribed in Spanish as escalibada, is a traditional dish from Catalonia, Valencia, Murcia and Aragón of smoky grilled vegetables. It typically consists of roasted eggplant and bell peppers with olive oil, and sometimes onion, tomato, minced garlic, and salt.\n\nThe name comes from the Catalan verb \"escalivar\", \"to cook in ashes,\" referencing the dish's traditional preparation in the embers of a wood fire.\n\nThe dish can be grilled outdoors on a grate until charred and soft, or may be cooked whole directly on glowing coals and then peeled. Indoors, the eggplant may be charred on a gas burner and the rest of the vegetables may be broiled.\n\nThe dish may be served as tapas, as a relish for grilled meats or fish such as tuna, with anchovies or olives in a salad, or as a topping for coca (Catalan flat bread, somewhat a pizza).\n"}
{"id": "71058", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71058", "title": "Catalan cuisine", "text": "Catalan cuisine\n\nCatalan cuisine is the cuisine from Catalonia. It may also refer to the shared cuisine of Roussillon and Andorra, the second of which has a similar cuisine to that of the neighbouring Alt Urgell and Cerdanya \"comarques\" and which is often referred to as \"Catalan mountain cuisine\". It is considered a part of western Mediterranean cuisine.\n\nIt relies heavily on ingredients popular along the Mediterranean coast, including fresh vegetables (especially tomato, garlic, eggplant (aubergine), capsicum, and artichoke), wheat products (bread, pasta), Arbequina olive oils, wines, legumes (beans, chickpeas), mushrooms, all sorts of pork preparations (sausage from Vic, ham), all sorts of cheese, poultry, lamb, and many types of fish like sardine, anchovy, tuna, and cod.\n\nThe traditional Catalan cuisine is quite diverse, ranging from pork-intensive dishes cooked in the inland part of the region (Catalonia is one of the main producers of swine products in Spain) to fish-based recipes along the coast.\n\nThe cuisine includes many preparations that mix sweet and savoury and stews with sauces based upon botifarra (pork sausage) and the characteristic \"picada\" (ground almonds, hazelnuts, pine nuts, etc. sometimes with garlic, herbs, biscuits).\n\n\n\n\nThere are 11 Catalan wine-growing regions qualified by the INCAVI (The Catalan Institute of Wine): Priorat, Penedès, Catalunya, Costers del Segre, Conca de Barberà, Montsant, Alella, Tarragona, Empordà, Pla del Bages and Terra Alta.\n\nThe sparkling wine cava, made mainly in the Penedès and Anoia regions, is the Catalan equivalent to champagne. It is widely exported.\n\n\"Moscatell\" (Empordà), is a sweet Catalan wine which have similar varieties in other countries such as France, Italy, Portugal, Albania, Slovenia, Greece, Romania and Turkey, as well as other regions of Spain. However, Catalan \"moscatell\" is thicker than French\" muscat\" and is not drunk before the meal (\"aperitiu\") but after it, either with or after dessert.\n\nSome Catalan authors, such as Josep Pla, Jaume Fàbrega or Eliana Thibaut i Comalada, and others like Colman Andrews, have suggested that, besides Catalonia proper, this cuisine takes in the Balearic and Valencian cuisines, but this opinion is challenged as politicised, and is not widespread, nor is it supported by either the Balearic or the Valencian government, while the Catalan government itself provides divergent points of view. In any case, mutual ties do exist between Catalan gastronomy and other western Mediterranean gastronomies, such as Balearic cuisine, Valencian cuisine, Southern French cuisine, Aragonese cuisine or Murcian cuisine.\n\nCatalan cooks and chefs are widely renowned and critically acclaimed all over the world. Three of The World's 50 Best Restaurants are in Catalonia, and four restaurants have three Michelin stars. Barcelona has nine Michelin stars including Cinc Sentits and has been chosen as the best gastronomical city by the American TV network MSNBC in 2009, topping the list of the ten best gastronomical cities in the world.\nIn Province of Girona are two of the best restaurants of the world, El Celler de Can Roca, the best of the world in 2014 and 2015, and elBulli, in Roses, the best one in 2002, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009 and 2nd in 2010, before its closure, in 2011.\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "71831", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=71831", "title": "Corned beef", "text": "Corned beef\n\nCorned beef is a salt-cured beef product. The term comes from the treatment of the meat with large-grained rock salt, also called \"corns\" of salt. Sometimes, sugar and spices are also added to corned beef recipes. Corned beef is featured as an ingredient in many cuisines.\n\nMost recipes include nitrates or nitrites, which convert the natural myoglobin in steak to nitrosomyoglobin, giving it a pink color. Nitrates and nitrites reduce the risk of dangerous botulism during curing by inhibiting the growth of \"Clostridium botulinum\" bacteria spores, but have been shown to be linked to increased cancer risk. Beef cured without nitrates or nitrites has a gray color, and is sometimes called \"New England corned beef\".\n\nCorned beef was popular during World War I and World War II when fresh meat was rationed. It also remains especially popular in Canada as an ingredient in a variety of dishes.\n\nAlthough the exact beginnings of corned beef are unknown, it most likely came about when people began preserving meat through salt-curing. Evidence of its legacy is apparent in numerous cultures, including ancient Europe and the Middle East. The word \"corn\" derives from Old English and is used to describe any small, hard particles or grains. In the case of \"corned beef\", the word may refer to the coarse, granular salts used to cure the beef. The word \"corned\" may also refer to the corns of potassium nitrate, also known as saltpeter, which were formerly used to preserve the meat.\n\nAlthough the practice of curing beef was found locally in many cultures, the industrial production of corned beef started in the British Industrial Revolution. Irish corned beef was used and traded extensively from the 17th century to the mid-19th century for British civilian consumption and as provisions for the British naval fleets and North American armies due to its nonperishable nature. The product was also traded to the French for use in Caribbean sugar plantations as sustenance for the colonists and the slave laborers. The 17th-century British industrial processes for corned beef did not distinguish between different cuts of beef beyond the tough and undesirable parts such as the beef necks and shanks. Rather, the grading was done by the weight of the cattle into \"small beef\", \"cargo beef\", and \"best mess beef\", the former being the worst and the latter the best. Much of the undesirable portions and lower grades were traded to the French, while better parts were saved for British consumption or shipped to British colonies.\nIreland produced a significant amount of the corned beef in the Atlantic trade from local cattle and salt imported from the Iberian Peninsula and southwestern France. Coastal cities, such as Dublin, Belfast, and Cork, created vast beef curing and packing industries, with Cork producing half of Ireland's annual beef exports in 1668. Although the production and trade of corned beef as a commodity was a source of great wealth for the colonial nations of Britain and France (which were participating in the Atlantic slave trade), in the colonies themselves, the product was looked upon with disdain due to its association with poverty and slavery.\n\nIncreasing corned beef production to satisfy the rising populations of the industrialised areas of Great Britain and Atlantic trade worsened the effects of the Irish Famine and the Great Potato Famine:\nDespite being a major producer of beef, most of the people of Ireland during this period consumed little of the meat produced, in either fresh or salted form, due to its prohibitive cost. This was because most of the farms and its produce were owned by wealthy Anglo-Irish who were absentee landlords and that most of the population were from families of poor tenant farmers, and that most of the corned beef was exported.\n\nThe lack of beef or corned beef in the Irish diet is especially true in the north of Ireland and areas away from the major centers for corned beef production. However, individuals living in these production centres such as Cork did consume the product to a certain extent. The majority of Irish who resided in Ireland at the time mainly consumed dairy products and meats such as pork or salt pork, bacon and cabbage being a notable example of a traditional Irish snack.\n\nCorned beef became a less important commodity in 19th-century Atlantic trade, due in part to the abolition of slavery, but corned beef production and its canned form remained an important food source during the Second World War. Much of the canned corned beef came from Fray Bentos in Uruguay, with over 16 million cans exported in 1943. Even now, significant amounts of the global canned corned beef supply comes from South America. Today, around 80% of the global canned corned beef supply originates from Brazil.\n\nIn North America, corned beef dishes are associated with traditional Irish cuisine. However, considerable debate remains about the association of corned beef with Ireland. Mark Kurlansky, in his book \"Salt\", states that the Irish produced a salted beef around the Middle Ages that was the \"forerunner of what today is known as Irish corned beef\" and in the 17th century, the English named the Irish salted beef \"corned beef\".\n\nSome say until the wave of 18th-century Irish immigration to the United States, many of the ethnic Irish had not begun to consume corned beef dishes as seen today. The popularity of corned beef compared to bacon among the immigrant Irish may have been due to corned beef being considered a luxury product in their native land, while it was cheaply and readily available in America.\n\nThe Jewish population produced similar salt-cured meat from beef brisket. Irish immigrants often purchased it as corned beef from Jewish butchers. This exchange was an example of the close interactions in everyday life of people from these two cultures in the United States' main 19th- and 20th-century immigrant port of entry, New York City.\n\nCanned corned beef has long been one of the standard meals included in military field ration packs around the world, due to its simplicity and instant preparation in such rations. One example is the American Meal, Ready-to-Eat (MRE) pack. Astronaut John Young snuck a contraband corned beef sandwich on board Gemini 3, hiding it in a pocket of his spacesuit.\n\nIn the United States and Canada, corned beef typically comes in two forms: a cut of beef (usually brisket, but sometimes round or silverside) cured or pickled in a seasoned brine; or cooked and canned.\n\nCorned beef is often purchased ready to eat in delicatessens. It is the key ingredient in the grilled Reuben sandwich, consisting of corned beef, Swiss cheese, sauerkraut, and Thousand Island or Russian dressing on rye bread. Smoking corned beef, typically with a generally similar spice mix, produces smoked meat (or \"smoked beef\") such as pastrami.\n\nCorned beef hash with potatoes is commonly served with eggs for breakfast.\n\nIn both the United States and Canada, corned beef is sold in cans in minced form. It is also sold this way in Puerto Rico and Uruguay.\n\nCorned beef is known specifically as \"salt beef\" in Newfoundland and Labrador, and is sold in buckets with brine to preserve the beef. It is a staple product culturally in Newfoundland and Labrador, providing a source of meat throughout their long winters. It is still commonly eaten in Newfoundland and Labrador, most often associated with the local Jiggs dinner meal. It has as of recent years been used in different meals locally, such as a Jiggs Dinner poutine dish.\n\nIn the United States, consumption of corned beef is often associated with Saint Patrick's Day. Corned beef is not considered an Irish national dish, and the connection with Saint Patrick's Day specifically originates as part of Irish-American culture, and is often part of their celebrations in North America.\n\nCorned beef was used as a substitute for bacon by Irish immigrants in the late 19th century. Corned beef and cabbage is the Irish-American variant of the Irish dish of bacon and cabbage.\nA similar dish is the New England boiled dinner, consisting of corned beef, cabbage, and root vegetables such as carrots, turnips, and potatoes, which is popular in New England and another similar dish, Jiggs dinner, is popular in parts of Atlantic Canada.\n\nThe U.S. version of corned beef is known in the UK as salt beef.\n\nThe appearance of corned beef in Irish cuisine dates to the 12th century in the poem \"Aislinge Meic Con Glinne\" or \"The Vision of MacConglinne\". Within the text, it is described as a delicacy a king uses to purge himself of the \"demon of gluttony\". Cattle, valued as a bartering tool, were only eaten when no longer able to provide milk or to work. The corned beef as described in this text was a rare and valued dish, given the value and position of cattle within the culture, as well as the expense of salt, and was unrelated to the corned beef eaten today.\n\nIn Israel, corned beef, or \"loof\", has been the traditional field ration of the Israeli army (Israel Defense Forces). As a result of universal conscription, it was said that Israel has been force-feeding \"Loof – a colloquially corrupt short form of 'meatloaf' – to its citizens since the nation's founding.\" While some sources state that \"loof\" was developed by the IDF in the 1940s, as a form of British \"bully beef\", it actually antedated the State of Israel as a component of Jewish organizations' relief packages sent to Palestine by groups such as Hadassah.\n\nIn New Zealand, both the canned and fresh varieties are referred to as corned beef; fresh corned beef is almost always made with silverside; 'silverside' and 'corned beef' are often used interchangably. Canned corned beef is especially popular among New Zealand's polynesian community, as in pacific island nations such as Western Samoa and Tonga.\n\nCorned beef has also become a common dish in Hong Kong cuisine, though it has been heavily adapted in style and preparation to fit local tastes. It is often served with other 'Western' fusion cuisine at cha chaan teng and other cheap restaurants catering to locals. Like most localized 'Western' food in East Asia, trade, imperialism, and war played roles in bringing and popularizing corned beef in Hong Kong.\n"}
{"id": "72346", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=72346", "title": "Kohen", "text": "Kohen\n\nKohen or cohen (or \"kohein\"; \"kohen\", \"priest\", pl. \"kohanim\", \"priests\") is the Hebrew word for \"priest\", used in reference to the Aaronic priesthood. Levitical priests or \"kohanim\" are traditionally believed and halakhically required to be of direct patrilineal descent from the biblical Aaron (also \"Aharon\"), brother of Moses.\n\nDuring the existence of the Temple in Jerusalem, \"kohanim\" performed the daily and holiday (Yom Tov) duties of sacrificial offerings. Today, \"kohanim\" retain a lesser though distinct status within Rabbinic and Karaite Judaism, and are bound by additional restrictions according to Orthodox Judaism.\n\nIn the Samaritan community, the kohanim have remained the primary religious leaders. Ethiopian Jewish religious leaders are sometimes called kahen, a form of the same word, but the position is not hereditary and their duties are more like those of rabbis than kohanim in most Jewish communities.\n\nThe noun \"kohen\" is used in the Torah to refer to priests, whether Jewish or pagan, such as the \"kohanim\" (\"priests\") of Baal (2 Kings 10:19) or Dagon, though Christian priests are referred to in Hebrew by the term \"komer\" (). \"Kohanim\" can also refer to the Jewish nation as a whole, as in Exodus 19:6, part of the Parshath Yithro, where the whole of Israel is addressed as \"a kingdom of priests and a holy nation\". The word derives from a Semitic root common at least to the Central Semitic languages; the cognate Arabic word \"kāhin\" means \"soothsayer, augur\", or \"priest\".\n\nTranslations in the paraphrase of the Aramaic Targumic interpretations include \"friend\" in Targum Yonathan to 2 Kings 10:11, \"master\" in Targum to Amos 7:10, and \"minister\" in Mechilta to Parshah Jethro (Exodus 18:1–20:23). As a starkly different translation the title \"worker\" (Rashi on Exodus 29:30) and \"servant\" (Targum to Jeremiah 48:7), have been offered as a translation as well.\n\nThe status of priest \"kohen\" was conferred on Aaron, the brother of Moses, and his sons as an everlasting covenant or a covenant of salt. During the 40 years of wandering in the wilderness and until the Holy Temple was built in Jerusalem, the priests performed their priestly service in the portable Tabernacle. (, , , ) Their duties involved offering the daily and Jewish holiday sacrifices, and blessing the people in a Priestly Blessing, later also known as \"Nesiat Kapayim\" (\"Raising of the hands\").\n\nIn a broader sense, since Aaron was a descendant of the Tribe of Levi, priests are sometimes included in the term \"Levites\", by direct patrilineal descent. However, not all Levites are priests.\n\nWhen the Temple existed, most sacrifices and offerings could only be conducted by priests. Non-priest Levites (i.e. all those who descended from Levi, the son of Jacob, but not from Aaron) performed a variety of other Temple roles, including ritual slaughter of animals, song service by use of voice and musical instruments, and various tasks in assisting the priests in performing their service.\n\nThe Torah mentions Melchizedek king of Salem, identified by Rashi as being Shem the son of Noah, as a \"priest\" \"kohen\" to El Elyon (the supreme God) . The second is Potiphera, priest of Heliopolis, then Jethro, priest of Midian both pagan priests of their era.\n\nWhen Esau sold the birthright of the first born to Jacob, Rashi explains that the priesthood was sold along with it, because by right the priesthood belongs to the first-born. Only when the first-born (along with the rest of Israel) sinned in the incident of the golden calf, the priesthood was given to the Tribe of Levi, which had not been tainted by this incident.\n\nMoses was supposed to receive the priesthood along with the leadership of the Jewish people, but when he argued with God that he should not be the leader, God then chose Aaron as the recipient of the priesthood.\n\nAaron received the priesthood along with his children and any descendants that would be born subsequently. However, his grandson Phinehas had already been born, and did not receive the priesthood until he killed the prince of the Tribe of Simeon and the princess of the Midianites (). Thereafter, the priesthood has remained with the descendants of Aaron.\n\nThe Torah provides for specific vestments to be worn by the priests when they are ministering in the Tabernacle: \"And you shall make holy garments for Aaron your brother, for dignity and for beauty\" (). These garments are described in detail in , and . The high priest wore eight holy garments (\"bigdei kodesh\"). Of these, four were of the same type worn by all priests, and four were unique to the Kohen Gadol.\n\nThose vestments which were common to all priests, were:\n\nThe vestments that were unique to the high priest were:\n\nThe high priest, like all priests, would minister barefoot when he was serving in the Temple. Like all of the priests, he had to immerse himself in the ritual bath before vesting and wash his hands and his feet before performing any sacred act. The Talmud teaches that neither the kohanim nor the Kohen Gadol were fit to minister unless they wore their priestly vestments: \"While they are clothed in the priestly garments, they are clothed in the priesthood; but when they are not wearing the garments, the priesthood is not upon them\" (B.Zevachim 17:B). It is further taught that just as the sacrifices facilitate an atonement for sin, so do the priestly garments (B.Zevachim 88b). The high priest had two sets of holy garments: the \"golden garments\" detailed above, and a set of white \"linen garments\" (\"bigdei ha-bad\") which he wore only on the Day of Atonement (Yom Kippur) (). On that day, he would change his holy garments four times, beginning in the golden garments but changing into the Linen Garments for the two moments when he would enter the Holy of Holies (the first time to offer the blood of atonement and the incense, and the second time to retrieve the censer), and then change back again into the golden garments after each time. He would immerse in the ritual bath before each change of garments, washing his hands and his feet after removing the garments and again before putting the other set on. The linen garments were only four in number, those corresponding to the garments worn by all priests (undergarments, tunic, sash and turban), but made only of white linen, with no embroidery. They could be worn only once, new sets being made each year.\n\nIn every generation when the Temple was standing, one kohen would be singled out to perform the functions of the High Priest (Hebrew \"kohen gadol\"). His primary task was the Day of Atonement service. Another unique task of the high priest was the offering of a daily meal sacrifice; he also held the prerogative to supersede any priest and offer any offering he chose. Although the Torah retains a procedure to select a High Priest when needed, in the absence of the Temple in Jerusalem, there is no High Priest in Judaism today.\n\nKing David assigned each of the 24 priestly clans to a weekly watch (Heb. משמרת, \"mishmeret\") during which its members were responsible for maintaining the schedule of offerings at the Temple in Jerusalem, in accordance with . Prior to that time, the priestly courses numbered a mere eight. This newly instated a cycle of priestly courses, or priestly divisions, which repeated itself roughly twice each year.\n\nWhen the First and Second Temples were built, the priests of Aaron’s lineage assumed these roles in the Temple in Jerusalem. Each of the 24 groups consisted of six priestly families, with each of the six serving one day of the week. On the Sabbath day, all six worked in tandem. According to later rabbinical interpretation, these 24 groups changed every Sabbath at the completion of the Mussaf service.. However, on the biblical festivals all 24 were present in the Temple for duty.\n\nAccording to the Jerusalem Talmud (Ta‘anith 4:2 / 20a): “Four wards came up out of exile: Yedaiah, Harim, Pašḥūr and Immer. The prophets among them had made a stipulation with them, namely, that even if Jehoiariv should come up out of exile, the officiating ward that serves in the Temple at that time should not be rejected on his account, but rather, he is to become secondary unto them.”\n\nFollowing the Temple's destruction at the end of the First Jewish Revolt and the displacement to the Galilee of the bulk of the remaining Jewish population in Judea at the end of the Bar Kochva Revolt, Jewish tradition in the Talmud and poems from the period record that the descendants of each priestly watch established a separate residential seat in towns and villages of the Galilee, and maintained this residential pattern for at least several centuries in anticipation of the reconstruction of the Temple and reinstitution of the cycle of priestly courses. Specifically, this kohanic settlement region stretched from the Beit Netofa Valley, through the Nazareth region to Arbel and the vicinity of Tiberias. In subsequent years, there was a custom of publicly recalling every Sabbath in the synagogues the courses of the priests, a practice that reinforced the prestige of the priests' lineage.\n\nProfessor Yosef Tobi, describing a stone inscription found in Yemen and which contains a partial list of the names (in Hebrew) of the twenty-four priestly courses and their places of residence, writes: \"As for the probable strong spiritual attachment held by the Jews of Ḥimyar for the Land of Israel, this is also attested to by an inscription bearing the names of the \"miśmarōṯ\" (priestly wards), which was initially discovered in September 1970 by W. Müller and then, independently, by P. Grjaznevitch within a mosque in Bayt al-Ḥāḍir, a village situated near Tan‘im, east of Ṣanʻā’. This inscription has been published by several European scholars, but the seminal study was carried out by E.E. Urbach (1973), one of the most important scholars of rabbinic literature in the previous generation. It should be noted that the priestly wards were seen as one of the most distinctive elements in the collective memory of the Jewish people as a nation during the period of Roman and Byzantine rule in the Land of Israel following the destruction of the Second Temple, insofar as they came to symbolize Jewish worship within the Land.”\n\nIt is now uncertain when this stone inscription was first engraved, but certainly it dates back to a time near the Second Temple’s destruction. The complete list of sacerdotal names would normally have included twenty-four priestly wards. However, today, the stone inscription contains only a partial list of their names, with their former places of residence – beginning from the fourth ward, and ending with the fourteenth ward. This was because the stone had been partially broken away, as also part of which was hidden underground. This is the longest roster of names of this kind ever discovered unto this day:\n\nAlthough kohanim may assume their duties once they reached physical maturity, the fraternity of kohanim generally would not allow young kohanim to begin service until they reached the age of twenty, and some opinions state that this age was thirty. There was no mandatory retirement age. Only when a kohen became physically infirm could he no longer serve.\nA kohen may become disqualified from performing his service for a host of reasons, including, but not limited to, Tumah, marital defilements, and physical blemishes. Of importance is that the kohen is never permanently disqualified from service but is permitted to return to his normal duties once the disqualification ceases.\n\nThe kohanim were compensated for their service to the nation and in the Temple through the twenty-four kohanic gifts. Of these 24 gifts, 10 are listed as to be given even outside the land of Israel. An example of the gifts given to the kohen in the Diaspora are most notably the five shekels of the Pidyon haben ceremony, and the giving of the foreleg, cheeks and abomasum from each Kosher-slaughtered animal.\n\nTorah verses and rabbinical commentary to the Tanakh imply that the kohen has a unique leadership role amongst the nation of Israel. In addition to the well-known role of the kohen to officiate in the sacrificial activity in the Temple (the Korbanot), the kohen is presumed to have the responsibility of being knowledgeable in the laws and nuances of the Torah and to be able to give accurate instruction in those laws to the Jewish people.\n\nRabbi Samson Raphael Hirsch explains this responsibility as not being the exclusive Torah instructors, but working in tandem with the rabbinic leaders of the era, while other rabbinic greats – notably the Chasam Sofer and Maharitz Chayes – acknowledged a unique assignment of torah instruction to the descendents of Aaron.\n\nAfter the destruction of the Second Temple and the suspension of sacrificial offerings, the formal role of priests in sacrificial services came to an end temporarily (until the rebuilding of the temple once more). Kohanim, however, retain a formal and public ceremonial role in synagogue prayer services. Kohanim also have a limited number of other special duties and privileges in Jewish religious practice. These special roles have been maintained in Orthodox Judaism, and sometimes in Conservative Judaism. Reform Judaism does not afford any special status or recognition to kohanim.\n\nEvery Monday, Thursday and Shabbat in Orthodox synagogues (and many Conservative ones as well), a portion from the Torah is read aloud in the original Hebrew in front of the congregation. On weekdays, this reading is divided into three; it is customary to call a kohen for the first reading (\"aliyah\"), a Levite for the second reading, and a member of any other Tribe of Israel to the third reading. On Shabbat, the reading is divided into seven portions; a kohen is called for the first \"aliyah\" and a levite to the second, and a member of another tribe for the rest.\n\nIf a kohen is not present, it is customary in many communities for a levite to take the first \"aliyah\" \"\"bimkom kohen\"\" (in the place of a kohen) and an Israelite the second and succeeding ones. This custom is not required by halakha (Jewish law), however, and Israelites may be called up for all aliyot.\n\nIn the late 12th and early 13th century, Rabbi Meir of Rothenburg ruled that, in a community consisting entirely of kohanim, the prohibition on calling kohanim for anything but the first two and \"maftir\" \"aliyot\" creates a deadlock situation which should be resolved by calling women to the Torah for all the intermediate \"aliyot\".\n\nThe Conservative Rabbinical Assembly's Committee on Jewish Law and Standards (CJLS), consistent with the Conservative movement's general view of the role of kohanim, has ruled that the practice of calling a kohen to the first aliyah represents a custom rather than a law, and that accordingly, a Conservative rabbi is not obligated to follow it. As such, in some Conservative synagogues, this practice is not followed.\n\nThe kohanim participating in an Orthodox and some other styles of traditional Jewish prayer service also deliver the priestly blessing, during the repetition of the \"Shemoneh Esrei\". They perform this service by standing and facing the crowd in the front of the congregation, with their arms held outwards and their hands and fingers in a specific formation, with a Jewish prayer shawl or Talit covering their heads and outstretched hands so that their fingers cannot be seen. Kohanim living in Israel and many Sephardic Jews living in areas outside Israel deliver the priestly blessing daily; Ashkenazi Jews living outside Israel deliver it only on Jewish holidays.\n\nOutside the synagogue, the kohen leads the \"Pidyon Haben\" ceremony. This symbolic Redemption of the first-born son is based on the Torah commandment, \"and you shall redeem all the firstborn of man among your sons\".\n\nOrthodox Judaism recognizes the rules as being in full force.\n\nA priest of Aaron's lineage (i.e. Kohen) is forbidden by the Mosaic Law (Torah) to marry a divorced woman even if she were a native Israelite. Likewise, a male descendant from Aaron's line is prohibited to marry a Jewish woman who has had intercourse with a non-Jew, whether she had been raped or she had willfully done so. So, too, he cannot marry a Jewish woman whose birth was by a father who is a Kohen but who violated one of these prohibitions. If he went ahead and did one of these three things, his male issue born from such union is no longer a priest (i.e. Kohen), but rather becomes a \"Ḥallal\" - a term designating one who is no longer a priest, but profaned. A priest must maintain an untainted lineage, and his mother must be of Jewish birth. If he married a non-Jewish woman from the gentile nations, his children are no longer priests, but gentiles. Had a priest of Aaron's lineage transgressed this prohibition and married a divorced woman, and they had children together, all of his female issue - whether his, or his sons, or his grandchildren - would be prohibited from marrying into the priestly stock for all generations.\n\nRape poses an especially poignant problem. The pain experienced by the families of kohanim who were required to divorce their wives as the result of the rapes accompanying the capture of Jerusalem is alluded to in this Mishnah:\n\nIf a woman were imprisoned by non-Jews concerning money affairs, she is permitted to her husband, but if for some capital offense, she is forbidden to her husband. If a town were overcome by besieging troops, all women of priestly stock found in it are ineligible [to be married to priests or to remain married to priests], but if they had witnesses, even a slave, or even a bondswoman, these may be believed. But no man may be believed for himself. Rabbi Zechariah ben Hakatsab said, \"By this Temple, her hand did not stir from my hand from the time the non-Jews entered Jerusalem until they went out.\" They said to him: No man may give evidence of himself.\n\nThe Israeli rabbinate will not perform a marriage halakhically forbidden to a kohen. For example, a kohen cannot legally marry a divorced or converted woman in the State of Israel, although a foreign marriage would be recognized.\n\nConservative Judaism has issued an emergency \"takanah\" (rabbinical edict) temporarily suspending the application of the rules in their entirety, on the grounds that the high intermarriage rate threatens the survival of Judaism, and hence that any marriage between Jews is welcomed. The \"takanah\" declares that the offspring of such marriages are to be regarded as kohanim. The movement allows a kohen to marry a convert or divorcee for these reasons:\n\n\"Kohen\" was a status that traditionally referred to men, passed from father to son, although there were situations where a \"bat kohen,\" daughter of a kohen, enjoyed some special status. For example, the first-born son of a bat \"kohen\", or the first-born son of a \"bat levi\" (the daughter of any levite) did not require the ritual of \"Pidyon HaBen.\" \n\nIn addition, females, although they did not serve in the Tabernacle or the Temple, were permitted to eat or benefit from some of the 24 kohanic gifts. However, if a \"kohen\"'s daughter married a man from outside the kohanic line, she was no longer permitted to benefit from the kohanic gifts. Conversely, the daughter of a non-\"kohen\" who married a \"kohen\" took on the same rights as an unmarried daughter of a \"kohen\".\n\nToday, Orthodox and many Conservative rabbis maintain the position that only a man can act as a \"kohen\", and that a daughter of a \"kohen\" is recognized as a \"bat kohen\" only in those very limited ways that have been identified in the past. Other Conservative rabbis, along with some Reform and Reconstructionist rabbis, are prepared to give equal \"kohen\" status to the daughter of a \"kohen\".\n\nOrthodox Judaism maintains that the privileges and status of \"kohanim\" stem primarily from their offerings and activities in the Temple. Accordingly, in Orthodox Judaism only men can perform the Priestly Blessing and receive the first \"aliyah\" during the public Torah reading, and women are generally not permitted to officiate in a \"Pidyon HaBen\" ceremony. However, the question of what acts (if any) a \"bat kohen\" can perform in an Orthodox context is a subject of current discussion and debate in some Orthodox circles.\n\nSome women's prayer groups that practice under the halakhic guidance of non-Orthodox rabbis, and which conduct Torah readings for women only, have adapted a custom of calling a \"bat kohen\" for the first \"aliyah\" and a \"bat levi\" for the second.\n\nConservative Judaism, consistent with its view that sacrifices in the Temple will not be restored and in light of many congregations' commitment to gender (but not caste) egalitarianism, interprets the Talmudic relevant passages to permit elimination of most distinctions between male and female \"kohanim\" in congregations that retain traditional tribal roles while modifying traditional gender roles. The Conservative movement bases this leniency on the view that the privileges of the \"kohen\" come not from offering Temple offerings but solely from lineal sanctity, and that ceremonies like the Priestly Blessing should evolve from their Temple-based origins. (The argument for women's involvement in the Priestly Blessing acknowledges that only male \"kohanim\" could perform this ritual in the days of the Temple, but that the ceremony is no longer rooted in Temple practice; its association with the Temple was by rabbinic decree; and rabbis therefore have the authority to permit the practice to evolve from its Temple-based roots). As a result, some Conservative synagogues permit a \"bat kohen\" to perform the Priestly Blessing and the Pidyon HaBen ceremony, and to receive the first \"aliyah\" during the Torah reading.\n\nThe Conservative halakha committee in Israel has ruled that women do not receive such \"aliyot\" and cannot validly perform such functions (rabbi Robert Harris, 5748). Therefore, not all Conservative congregations or rabbis permit these roles for \"bnot kohanim\" (daughters of priests). Moreover, many egalitarian-oriented Conservative synagogues have abolished traditional tribal roles and do not perform ceremonies involving \"kohanim\" (such as the Priestly Blessing or calling a \"kohen\" to the first \"aliyah\"), and many traditionalist Conservative synagogues have retained traditional gender roles and do not permit women to perform these roles at all.\n\nBecause most Reform and Reconstructionist temples have abolished traditional tribal distinctions, roles, and identities on grounds of egalitarianism, a special status for a \"bat kohen\" has very little significance in these movements.\n\nSince the Y chromosome is inherited only from one's father (women have no Y chromosome), all direct male lineages share a common haplotype. Therefore, testing was done across sectors of the Jewish and non-Jewish population to see if there was any commonality among their Y chromosomes. The initial research by Hammer, Skorecki, et al. was based on a limited study of 188 subjects, which identified a narrow set of genetic markers found in slightly more than 50% of Jews with a tradition of priestly descent and approximately 5% of Jews who did not believe themselves to be kohanim.\n\nOver the succeeding decade, Hammer, Skorecki, and other researchers continued to collect genetic material from Jewish and non-Jewish populations around the world. The most recent results suggest that 46% of those who have a family tradition of Priestly descent belong to the Y-DNA haplogroup identified as J-P58, and that at least two-thirds of that 46% have very similar Y-DNA sequences indicating comparatively recent common ancestry. A further 14% of kohanim were found to belong to another lineage, in haplogroup J2a-M410. In contrast, the so-called Cohen Modal Haplotype (CMH), a characteristic Y chromosome haplotype earlier identified in a majority of men self-reporting as kohanim, is found in as much as 5% to 8% of Jews who have no family tradition of being kohanim, and only 1.5% were found to have the closest match to the most detailed sequence. Amongst non-Jews, the CMH can be found among non-Jewish Yemenites (>67.7%) and Jordanians (~7%), but none were found to most closely match the most detailed sequence. Thus, studies document certain distinctions among the Y chromosomes of kohanim, implying that a substantial proportion of kohanim share some common male ancestry.\n\nSince the religious status of a kohen is contingent upon being the male biological descendant of Aaron in conjunction with numerous other variables that are not subject to genetic testing (the wife of a kohen cannot have had relations with a non-Jew, be a divorcee etc.) the possession of a common haplotype does not provide sufficient evidence to confer or maintain the religious status of a kohen, which depends on more than simple heredity. This loss of priestly status over time may account for the 1.5% of non-kohen Jews who very closely match the Y chromosome sequence that is most common amongst kohanim.\n\nThe status of kohen in Judaism has no necessary relationship to a person's surname. Though it is true that descendants of kohanim often bear surnames that reflect their genealogy, there are many families with the surname Cohen (or any number of variations) who are not kohanim nor even Jewish. Conversely, there are many kohanim who do not have Cohen as a surname.\n\nThere are numerous variations to the spelling of the surname Cohen. These are often corrupted by translation or transliteration into or from other languages, as exemplified below (not a complete list).\n\n\nIn contemporary Israel, \"Moshe Cohen\" is the equivalent of \"John Smith\" in English-speaking countries – i.e., proverbially the most common of names.\n\nOne common interpretation of the practice of having three pieces of matzah on a Seder plate is that they represent \"Kohen, Levi and Yisrael\" (i.e., the priests, the tribe of Levi, and all other Jewish people).\n\nAccording to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, either \"literal descendants of Aaron\", or worthy Melchizedek priesthood holders have the legal right to constitute the Presiding Bishopric under the authority of the First Presidency (). To date, all men who have served on the Presiding Bishopric have been Melchizedek priesthood holders, and none have been publicly identified as descendants of Aaron. See also Mormonism and Judaism.\n\nThe positioning of the kohen's hands during the Priestly Blessing was Leonard Nimoy's inspiration for Mr. Spock's Vulcan salute in the . Nimoy, raised an Orthodox Jew (but not a kohen), used the salute when saying \"Live long and prosper.\"\n\nThe Priestly Blessing was used by Leonard Cohen in his farewell blessing during \"Whither Thou Goest\", the closing song on his concerts. Leonard Cohen himself was from a kohen family. He also used the drawing of the Priestly Blessing as one of his logos.\n\nIn 1938, with the outbreak of violence that would come to be known as Kristallnacht, American Orthodox rabbi Mnachem HaKohen Risikoff wrote about the central role he saw for Priests and Levites in terms of Jewish and world responses, in worship, liturgy, and \"teshuva\", repentance. In הכהנים והלוים HaKohanim vHaLeviim (1940) \"The Priests and the Levites\", he stressed that members of these groups exist in the realm between history (below) and redemption (above), and must act in a unique way to help move others to prayer and action, and help bring an end to suffering. He wrote, \"Today, we also are living through a time of flood, Not of water, but of blood, which burns and turns Jewish life into ruin. We are now drowning in a flood of blood...Through the Kohanim and Levi'im help will come to all Israel.\"\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "74167", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74167", "title": "Poutine", "text": "Poutine\n\nPoutine (; ) is a dish originating from the Canadian province of Quebec, consisting of French fries and cheese curds topped with a brown gravy. The dish emerged in the late 1950s in the Centre-du-Québec area and has long been associated with the cuisine of Quebec. For many years, it was negatively perceived and mocked, and even used as a means of stigmatization against Quebec society. Later, poutine became celebrated as a symbol of Québécois cultural pride, and its rise in prominence led to popularity outside the province, especially in the rest of Central Canada, in the Northeastern United States and even Japan.\n\nAnnual poutine celebrations occur in Montreal, Quebec City, and Drummondville, as well as Toronto, Ottawa, Chicago, and Manchester, New Hampshire. Today, it is often identified as quintessential Canadian food and has been called \"Canada's national dish\", though some believe this labelling represents misappropriation of Québécois culture. Many variations on the original recipe are popular, leading some to suggest that poutine has emerged as a new dish classification in its own right, just like sandwiches, dumplings, soups, and flatbreads.\n\nThe dish originated in the Centre-du-Québec area in the late 1950s. Several restaurants from the area claim to be the inventor of the dish (\"Le Roy Jucep\" in Drummondville, \"Le Lutin qui rit\" in Warwick and \"La Petite Vache\" in Princeville) but no consensus exists. Poutine was originally consumed in small \"greasy spoon\" type diners (commonly known as \"cantines\" or \"casse-croûtes\" in Quebec) and pubs, as well as by roadside chip wagons (commonly known as \"cabanes à patates\", literally \"potato shacks\") and in hockey arenas. Today, poutine is found in all types of restaurants.\n\nA common source for the founding of poutine comes from Drummondville. A local restaurant in the town of Le Roy Jucep has a registered trademark which states that \"The Roy Jucep\" invented poutine. In 1964, the owner of this restaurant, Jean-Paul Roy, served poutine as we know it today: \"fried potatoes, cheese and sauce\". According to his testimony, Roy (after the frequent requests of a few of his customers), started serving cheese with fries and sauce. In August 2007, Jean-Paul Roy died in Drummondville. The official patent, granted by the Canadian Intellectual Property Office, is posted in the restaurant.\n\nOne often-cited tale is that of Warwick restaurateur Fernand Lachance of Le Café Ideal, who is said in 1957 to have exclaimed, \"\"ça va faire une maudite poutine!\"\" (\"It will make a damn mess!\") when asked by restaurant regular Eddy Lainesse to put a handful of cheese curds on some french fries, hence the name. The sauce was allegedly added later, in 1962, to keep the fries warm longer.\n\nOne other legend states that the birth of poutine took place in a restaurant called La Petite Vache, in Princeville. An original designation, the \"Mixte\", was a 50–50 reference to the mixture of 50% fries and 50% cheese.\n\nThe \"Dictionnaire historique du français québécois\" lists 15 different meanings of \"poutine\" in Québécois and Acadian French, most of which are for kinds of food; the word \"poutine\" in the meaning \"fries with cheese and gravy\" is dated to 1982. Other senses of the word have been in use since at least 1810.\n\nWhile the exact provenance of the word \"poutine\" is uncertain, some attribute it to the English word \"pudding\". Among its various culinary senses, that of \"a dessert made from flour or bread crumbs\" most clearly shows this influence; the word \"pouding\", borrowed from the English \"pudding\", is in fact a synonym in this sense.\n\nThe \"Dictionnaire historique\" mentions the possibility that the form \"poutine\" is simply a gallicization of the word \"pudding\". However, it considers it more likely that it was inherited from regional languages spoken in France, and that some of its meanings resulted from the later influence of the similar-sounding English word \"pudding\". It cites the Provençal forms \"poutingo\" \"bad stew\" and \"poutité\" \"hodgepodge\" or \"crushed fruit or foods\"; \"poutringo\" \"mixture of various things\" in Languedocien; and \"poutringue\" or \"potringa\" \"bad stew\" in Franche-Comté as possibly related to \"poutine\". The meaning \"fries with cheese and gravy\" of \"poutine\" is among those held as probably unrelated to \"pudding\", provided the latter view is correct.\n\nAccording to Merriam-Webster, a popular etymology is that \"poutine\" is from a Québécois slang word meaning \"mess\".\n\nIn the basic recipe for poutine, French fries are covered with fresh cheese curds, and topped with brown gravy. In a traditional Quebec poutine:\n\nHeavy beef- or pork-based brown gravies are rarely used. To maintain the texture of the fries, the cheese curd and gravy are added immediately prior to serving the dish. The hot gravy is usually poured over the room-temperature cheese curds, so that the cheese is warmed without completely melting. It is important to control the temperature, timing, and the order in which the ingredients are added, so as to obtain the right food textures which is an essential part of the experience of eating poutine.\n\nThere are many variations of poutine. Some restaurants offer poutine with such toppings as sausage, chicken, bacon, brisket, or Montreal-style smoked meat. Some \"poutineries\" even boast dozens of variations of poutine. More upscale poutine with three-pepper sauce, merguez sausage, foie gras or even caviar and truffle can be found, a pre-2000 trend that is credited to David MacMillan of 'Joe Beef' and 'Globe' restaurants fame. Some variations eliminate the cheese, but most Québécois would call such a dish a \"frite sauce\" (\"french fries with sauce\") rather than poutine. Shawinigan and some other regions have \"patate-sauce-choux\" where shredded raw cabbage replaces cheese. Fast food combination meals in Canada often have the options of getting french fries \"poutinized\" by adding cheese curds (or shredded cheese in the Prairies and Western Canada) and gravy, or subbing the fries for a poutine. The popular chain Chez Ashton of the Quebec City area is known for its poutine \"Galvaude\" (topped with chicken and green peas) and \"Dulton\" (with ground beef).\n\nSweet potato has been used to be a healthy alternative to french fries. The idea of adding dietary fiber and vitamins to this classic dish is widely endorsed by the public. Crinkle-cut fries may be used as well.\n\nChains such as Smoke's Poutinerie, New York Fries, McDonald's, Wendy's, A&W, KFC, Burger King, Harvey's, Mary Brown's, Arby's, and Wahlburgers restaurants also sell versions of poutine in Quebec and the rest of Canada (although not always country-wide). Tim Hortons, the quick service restaurant chain, started selling poutine in some stores in 2018.\n\nPoutine is found in the northern border regions of the United States, including New England and the larger Northeast, the Pacific Northwest, and the Upper Midwest. These regions offer further variations of the basic dish, usually by utilizing cheeses other than fresh curds. In the country culture, a mixed fry can also come with cooked ground beef on top and is referred to as a hamburger mix, though this is less popular than a regular mix.\n\nDisco fries, in which french fries are covered in mozzarella cheese and brown gravy were popularized in New Jersey in the 1940s. They gained their name in the 1970s for being a favorite of late-night diners, who often came from dancing at disco clubs.\n\nA cultural marker, poutine has long been Quebec's adored junk food before spreading out across the rest of Canada and the United States. It is said to be \"the perfect thing after a night of drinking\".\n\nPoutine served as a comfort food for the local community after the Lac-Megantic derailment. Three varieties are offered at the Le Cellier Steakhouse at Epcot Center's Canada pavilion.\n\nIn May 2014, the word \"poutine\" was added to the Merriam-Webster dictionary of the English language.\n\nIn 2007, the CBC declared the outcome of an online survey on the greatest Canadian inventions of all time. Poutine arrived at No. 10, beating, among other items, the electron microscope, the BlackBerry, and the paint roller.\n\nPoutine has been a highlight of the London, UK, \"Canada Day\" celebrations in Trafalgar Square for several years.\n\nPoutine has since made inroads into proper culinary circles, challenging its junk food status. Thus in 2011, well-known chef Chuck Hughes won on \"Iron Chef America\" (episode 2 of ) by beating out his heavyweight competitor Bobby Flay with a plate of lobster poutine.\n\nIn 2013, Jones Soda Co., originally a Canadian company but now based in the US, created a poutine-flavoured limited-edition soft drink, which got international pop culture attention.\n\nIn 2014, bacon-poutine was one of four flavours selected as a finalist in the Lay's Canada 'Do Us A Flavour' potato chip contest, although it did not win that competition. However, Lay's has since added a bacon-poutine variety in its 'Canada' entry for the 'World Flavourites', and Loblaws' President's Choice and Ruffles brands offer poutine-flavoured potato chips in Canada.\n\nSmoke's Poutinerie sponsors a world poutine eating championship, and also a cross-Canada poutine eating tour.\n\nMontreal hosts a competitive \"La Poutine Week\" every year in February. Members of the public can download an app in order to rate the poutines they have tried. Ottawa-Gatineau, Toronto, Calgary, Quebec City, Sherbrooke, Vancouver and others similarly hold their own weeks. Some United States cities such as Manchester, NH (NH PoutineFest), Chicago, IL, and Knoxville, TN, have festivals also.\n\nThe social status of poutine has dramatically evolved since its origin in rural Quebec in the 1950s. The dish was long mocked as a culinary invention and even used as a means of stigmatization used against the Quebec society to reduce its legitimacy. While the first generations that suffered from the poutine stigma opted to disidentify with the dish, Quebec youth has recently been operating a reappropriation of poutine to positively revalue the dish as a symbol of Quebecois cultural pride. Today, the dish is celebrated in many annual poutine festivals in Quebec, the rest of Canada, and in the United States. In March 2016 poutine was served at the White House during the first State Dinner between Barack Obama and Justin Trudeau.\n\nThe evolution of the different symbols associated with poutine were first studied by Charles-Alexandre Théorêt in \"Maudite Poutine!\". Théorêt revisited many of these stigmas in an interview given at \"Tout le monde en parle\" on 11 November 2007.\n\nAs poutine gained popularity outside Quebec provincial borders in the mid-2000s, the dish gradually stopped being mocked and was eventually introduced into the popular discourse and symbol of Canadian nationalism. Today, the dish is often presented as being of Canadian cuisine, even as Canada's national dish. Nicolas Fabien-Ouellet, the author of \"Poutine Dynamics\" (a peer-reviewed article published in the journal \"CuiZine\") has suggested that this \"Canadization\" of poutine constitutes cultural appropriation, despite the fact that Quebec is part of Canada. This supposed appropriation is not linked to its preparation or consumption outside Quebec provincial borders per se, but strictly to its presentation as a Canadian dish instead of Quebecois dish.\n\nIn a \"Talking to Americans\" segment on the Canadian mock television news show \"This Hour Has 22 Minutes\" during the 2000 American election, comedian Rick Mercer posed as a reporter and asked several people (including then-Texas governor George W. Bush) what they thought of \"Prime Minister Jean Poutine\" and his endorsement of Bush for president. (The Prime Minister of Canada at the time was Jean Chrétien.) None of the interviewees noticed the insertion of \"Poutine\". A few years later when Bush made his first official visit to Canada as President, he joked during a speech, \"I told [Prime Minister] Paul [Martin] that I really have only one regret about this visit to Canada. There's a prominent citizen who endorsed me in the 2000 election, and I wanted a chance to finally thank him for that endorsement. I was hoping to meet Jean Poutine.\" The remark was met with laughter and applause.\n\nDuring the 2011 Canadian federal election voter suppression scandal, misleading phone calls registered to a \"Pierre Poutine\" of \"Separatist Street\" in Joliette, Quebec, were made in at least 14 ridings, including Guelph, Ontario. The fraudulent calls directed voters to the wrong polling stations. Through court orders of document releases from Rogers Communications the source of the calls was eventually traced and appeared to correspond to the campaign office of Conservative Party of Canada candidate Marty Burke.\n\nBelgian Prime Minister, Charles Michel, had a Canadian lunch with Justin Trudeau on June 16, 2017, where they ate hotdogs and poutine. However, Charles Michel tweeted later that this was \"A great way to meet a dear friend though our fries are better\", referring to the popular claim that fries were originally invented in Belgium.\n"}
{"id": "74803", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=74803", "title": "Doughnut", "text": "Doughnut\n\nA doughnut (British English) or donut (American English) (both: or ; see etymology section) is a type of fried dough confection or dessert food. The doughnut is popular in many countries and prepared in various forms as a sweet snack that can be homemade or purchased in bakeries, supermarkets, food stalls, and franchised specialty vendors.\n\nDoughnuts are usually deep fried from a flour dough, and typically either ring-shaped or a number of shapes without a hole, and often filled, but can also be ball-shaped (\"doughnut holes\"). Other types of batters can also be used, and various toppings and flavorings are used for different types, such as sugar, chocolate, or maple glazing. Doughnuts may also include water, leavening, eggs, milk, sugar, oil, shortening, and natural or artificial flavors.\n\nThe two most common types are the ring doughnut and the filled doughnut, which is injected with fruit preserves, cream, custard, or other sweet fillings. Alternatively, small pieces of dough are sometimes cooked as \"doughnut holes\". Once fried, doughnuts may be \"glazed\" with a sugar icing, spread with icing or chocolate on top, or topped with powdered sugar or sprinkles or fruit. Other shapes include rings, balls, flattened spheres, twists, and other forms. Doughnut varieties are also divided into cake (including the old-fashioned) and yeast-risen type doughnuts. Doughnuts are often accompanied by coffee purchased at doughnut shops or fast food restaurants, but can also be paired with milk.\n\nRing doughnuts are formed by one of two methods: by joining the ends of a long, skinny piece of dough into a ring, or by using a doughnut cutter, which simultaneously cuts the outside and inside shape, leaving a doughnut-shaped piece of dough and a doughnut hole (from the dough removed from the center). This smaller piece of dough can be cooked and served as a \"doughnut hole\" or added back to the batch to make more doughnuts. A disk-shaped doughnut can also be stretched and pinched into a torus until the center breaks to form a hole. Alternatively, a doughnut depositor can be used to place a circle of liquid dough (batter) directly into the fryer.\n\nThere are two types of ring doughnuts, those made from a yeast-based dough for raised doughnuts, or those made from a special type of cake batter. Yeast-raised doughnuts contain about 25% oil by weight, whereas cake doughnuts' oil content is around 20%, but they have extra fat included in the batter before frying. Cake doughnuts are fried for about 90 seconds at approximately , turning once. Yeast-raised doughnuts absorb more oil because they take longer to fry, about 150 seconds, at . Cake doughnuts typically weigh between , whereas yeast-raised doughnuts average and are generally larger, and taller (due to rising) when finished.\n\nAfter frying, ring doughnuts are often topped. Raised doughnuts are generally covered with a glaze (icing). Cake doughnuts can also be glazed, or powdered with confectioner's sugar, or covered with cinnamon and granulated sugar. They are also often topped with cake frosting (top-side only) and sometimes sprinkled with coconut, chopped peanuts, or sprinkles (also called jimmies).\n\nDoughnut holes are small, bite-sized doughnuts that were traditionally made from the dough taken from the center of ring doughnuts. Before long, doughnut sellers saw the opportunity to market \"holes\" as a novelty and many chains offer their own variety, some with their own brand names such as \"Munchkins\" from Dunkin' Donuts and \"Timbits\" from Tim Hortons.\n\nTraditionally, doughnut holes are made by frying the dough removed from the center portion of the doughnut. Consequently, they are considerably smaller than a standard doughnut and tend to be spherical. Similar to standard doughnuts, doughnut holes may be topped with confections, such as glaze or powdered sugar.\n\nOriginally, most varieties of doughnut holes were derivatives of their ring doughnut (yeast-based dough or cake batter) counterparts. However, doughnut holes can also be made by dropping a small ball of dough into hot oil from a specially shaped nozzle or cutter. This production method has allowed doughnut sellers to produce bite-sized versions of non-ring doughnuts, such as filled doughnuts, fritters and Dutchies.\n\nFilled doughnuts are flattened spheres injected with fruit preserves, cream, custard, or other sweet fillings, and often dipped into powdered sugar or topped off with frosting. Common varieties include the Boston cream, coconut, key lime, and jelly.\n\nOthers include the fritter and the Dutchie, which are usually glazed. These have been available on Tim Hortons' doughnut menu since the chain's inception in 1964, and a 1991 \"Toronto Star\" report found these two were the chain's most popular type of fried dough in Canada.\n\nThere are many other specialized doughnut shapes such as old-fashioned, bars or Long Johns (a rectangular shape), or with the dough twisted around itself before cooking. In the northeast United States, bars and twists are usually referred to as \"crullers\". Another is the beignet, a square-shaped doughnut covered with powdered sugar, commonly associated with New Orleans.\n\nThe earliest origins to the modern doughnuts are generally traced back to the \"olykoek\" (\"oil(y) cake\") Dutch settlers brought with them to early New York (or New Amsterdam). These doughnuts closely resembled later ones but did not yet have their current ring shape. One of the earliest mentions of \"doughnut\" was in Washington Irving's 1809 book \"A History of New York, from the Beginning of the World to the End of the Dutch Dynasty\":\nSometimes the table was graced with immense apple-pies, or saucers full of preserved peaches and pears; but it was always sure to boast of an enormous dish of balls of sweetened dough, fried in hog’s fat, and called dough-nuts, or oly koeks: a delicious kind of cake, at present scarce known in this city, excepting in genuine Dutch families.\nThe name \"oly koeks\" was almost certainly related to the \"oliekoek\": a Dutch delicacy of \"sweetened cake fried in fat.\"\n\nAccording to anthropologist Paul R. Mullins, the first cookbook mentioning doughnuts was an 1803 English volume which included doughnuts in an appendix of American recipes. He also traces its origins to the \"oliekoek\" that arrived in America with the Dutch settlers in the early 18th century. By the mid-19th century, the doughnut looked and tasted like today's doughnut, and was viewed as a thoroughly American food.\n\nHanson Gregory, an American, claimed to have invented the ring-shaped doughnut in 1847 aboard a lime-trading ship when he was 16 years old. Gregory was dissatisfied with the greasiness of doughnuts twisted into various shapes and with the raw center of regular doughnuts. He claimed to have punched a hole in the center of dough with the ship's tin pepper box, and to have later taught the technique to his mother. \"Smithsonian Magazine\" states that his mother, Elizabeth Gregory, \"made a deep-fried dough that cleverly used her son's spice cargo of nutmeg and cinnamon, along with lemon rind,\" and \"put hazelnuts or walnuts in the center, where the dough might not cook through\", and called the food 'doughnuts'.\n\nAnother theory on their origin came to light in 2013, when a recipe for \"dow nuts\" was found in a book of recipes and domestic tips written around 1800 by the wife of Baron Thomas Dimsdale, the recipe being given to the dowager Baroness by an acquaintance who transcribed for her the cooking instructions for a \"dow nut\".\n\nThe earliest known recorded usage of the term dates to an 1808 short story describing a spread of \"fire-cakes and dough-nuts\". Washington Irving's reference to \"doughnuts\" in 1809 in his \"History of New York\" is more commonly cited as the first written recording of the term. Irving described \"balls of sweetened dough, fried in hog's fat, and called doughnuts, or\" olykoeks\".\" These \"nuts\" of fried dough might now be called doughnut holes (see holes section). The word \"nut\" is here used in the earlier sense of \"small rounded cake or cookie\". \"Doughnut\" is the traditional spelling and still dominates even in the United States though \"donut\" is often used. At present, \"doughnut\" and the shortened form \"donut\" are both pervasive in American English.\n\nThe first known printed use of \"donut\" was in \"Peck's Bad Boy and his Pa\" by George W. Peck, published in 1900, in which a character is quoted as saying, \"Pa said he guessed he hadn't got much appetite, and he would just drink a cup of coffee and eat a donut.\" According to John T. Edge (\"Donuts, an American passion\" 2006) the alternative spelling \"donut\" was invented when the New York–based Display Doughnut Machine Corporation abbreviated the word to make it more pronounceable by the foreigners they hoped would buy their automated doughnut making equipment. The donut spelling also showed up in a \"Los Angeles Times\" article dated August 10, 1929 in which Bailey Millard jokingly complains about the decline of spelling, and that he \"can't swallow the 'wel-dun donut' nor the ever so 'gud bred'.\"\n\nThe interchangeability of the two spellings can be found in a series of \"National Donut Week\" articles in \"The New York Times\" that covered the 1939 World's Fair. In four articles beginning October 9, two mention the \"donut\" spelling. Dunkin' Donuts, which was so-named in 1950, following its 1948 founding under the name Open Kettle (Quincy, Massachusetts), is the oldest surviving company to use the \"donut\" variation; other chains, such as the defunct Mayflower Doughnut Corporation (1931), did not use that spelling. According to the Oxford Dictionary while \"doughnut\" is used internationally, the spelling \"donut\" is American. The spelling \"donut\" remained rare until the 1950s, and has since grown significantly in popularity; this growth in use has possibly been influenced by the spread of Dunkin' Donuts.\n\nNational Doughnut Day, also known as National Donut Day, celebrated in the United States of America, is on the first Friday of June each year, succeeding the Doughnut Day event created by The Salvation Army in 1938 to honor those of their members who served doughnuts to soldiers during World War I. About 250 Salvation Army volunteers went to France. Because of the difficulties of providing freshly baked goods from huts established in abandoned buildings near the front lines, the two Salvation Army volunteers (Ensign Margaret Sheldon and Adjutant Helen Purviance) came up with the idea of providing doughnuts. These are reported to have been an \"instant hit\", and \"soon many soldiers were visiting The Salvation Army huts\". Margaret Sheldon wrote of one busy day: \"Today I made 22 pies, 300 doughnuts, 700 cups of coffee.\"\nSoon, the women who did this work became known by the servicemen as \"Doughnut Dollies\".\n\nIn the US, especially in Southern California, fresh doughnuts sold by the dozen at local doughnut shops are typically packaged in generic pink boxes. This phenomenon can be attributed to Ted Ngoy and Ning Yen, refugees of the Cambodian genocide who transformed the local doughnut shop industry. They proved so adept at the business and in training fellow Chinese Cambodian refugees to follow suit that these local doughnut shops soon dominated native franchises such as Winchell's Donuts. Initially desiring boxes of a lucky red color rather than the standard white, Ngoy and Yen settled on a cheaper, leftover pink stock. Owing to the success of their business, the color soon became a recognizable standard. Due to the locality of Hollywood, the pink boxes frequently appeared as film and television props and were thus transmitted into popular culture.\n\nYeast doughnuts and cake doughnuts contain most of the same ingredients, however, their structural differences arise from the type of flour and leavening agent used. In cake doughnuts, cake flour is used, and the resulting doughnut is denser because cake flour has a relatively low gluten content of about 7 to 8 percent. In yeast doughnuts, a flour with a higher protein content of about 9 to 12 percent is used, resulting in a doughnut that is lighter and more airy. In addition, yeast doughnuts utilize yeast as a leavening agent. Specifically, \"Yeast cells are thoroughly distributed throughout the dough and begin to feed on the sugar that is present ... carbon dioxide gas is generated, which raises the dough, making it light and porous.\" Whereas this process is biological, the leavening process in cake doughnuts is chemical. In cake doughnuts, the most common leavening agent is baking powder. Baking powder is essentially \"baking soda with acid added. This neutralizes the base and produces more CO according to the following equation: NaHCO + H → Na + HO + CO\"\n\nThe physical structure of the doughnut is created by the combination of flour, leavening agent, sugar, eggs, salt, water, shortening, milk solids, and additional components. The most important ingredients for creating the dough network are the flour and eggs. The main protein in flour is gluten, which is overall responsible for creating elastic dough because this protein acts as \"coiled springs.\" The gluten network is composed of two separate molecules named glutenin and gliadin. Specifically, \"the backbone of the gluten network likely consists of the largest glutenin molecules, or subunits, aligned and tightly linked to one another. These tightly linked glutenin subunits associate more loosely, along with gliadin, into larger gluten aggregates.\" The gluten strands than tangle and interact with other strands and other molecules, resulting in networks that provide the elasticity of the dough. In mixing, the gluten is developed when the force of the mixer draws the gluten from the wheat endosperm, allowing the gluten matrix to trap the gas cells.\n\nEggs function as emulsifiers, foaming agents, and tenderizers in the dough. The egg white proteins, mainly ovalbumin, \"function as structure formers. Egg solids, chiefly the egg white solids combined with the moisture in the egg, are considered structure-forming materials that help significantly to produce proper volume, grain, and texture.\" The egg yolk contributes proteins, fats, and emulsifiers to the dough. Emulsifying agents are essential to doughnut formation because they prevent the fat molecules from separating from the water molecules in the dough. The main emulsifier in egg yolk is called lecithin, which is a phospholipid. \"The fatty acids are attracted to fats and oils (lipids) in food, while the phosphate group is attracted to water. It is this ability to attract both lipids and water that allow phospholipids such as lecithin to act as emulsifiers.\" The proteins from both the egg yolk and the egg whites contribute to the structure of the dough through a process called coagulation. When heat is applied to the dough, the egg proteins will begin to unfold, or denature, and then form new bonds with one another, thus creating a gel-like network that can hold water and gas.\n\nShortening is responsible for providing tenderness and aerating the dough. In terms of its molecular structure, \"a typical shortening that appears solid [at room temperature] contains 15-20% solids and, hence, 80-85% liquid oil ... this small amount of solids can be made to hold all of the liquid in a matrix of very small, stable, needlelike crystals (beta-prime crystals).\" This crystalline structure is considered highly stable due to how tightly its molecules are packed. The sugar used in baking is essentially sucrose, and besides imparting sweetness in the doughnut, sugar also functions in the color and tenderness of the final product. Sucrose is a simple carbohydrate whose structure is made up of a glucose molecule bound to a fructose molecule. Milk is utilized in the making of doughnuts, but in large scale bakeries, one form of milk used is nonfat dry milk solids. These solids are obtained by removing most of the water from skim milk with heat, and this heat additionally denatures the whey proteins and increases the absorption properties of the remaining proteins. The ability of the casein and whey proteins to absorb excess water is essential to prolonging the doughnut's freshness. The major whey protein in the nonfat milk solids is known as beta-lactoglobulin, and a crucial feature of its structure is that there exists a single sulfhydryl group that is protected by the alpha helix, and when heating of the milk solids occurs, these groups participate in disulfide exchanges with other molecules. This interchange prevents the renaturation of the whey proteins. If the crosslinking of the sulfide groups does not occur, the whey proteins can rebond and weaken the gluten network.\n\nWater is a necessary ingredient in the production of doughnuts because it activates the other ingredients, allowing them to perform their functions in building the doughnut's structure. For example, sugar and salt crystals must be dissolved in order for them to act in the dough, whereas larger molecules, such as the starches or proteins, must be hydrated in order for them to absorb moisture. Another important consideration of water is its degree of hardness, which measures the amount of impurities in the water source. Pure water consists of two parts hydrogen and one part oxygen, but water used in baking often is not pure. Baker's salt (NaCl) is usually used as an ingredient due to its high purity, whereas the salts in water are derived from varying minerals. As an ingredient, \"salt is added to enhance the flavour of cakes and breads and to ‘toughen up’ the soft mixture of fat and sugar.\" If relatively soft water is being used, more salt should be added in order to strengthen the gluten network of the dough, but if not enough salt is added during the baking process, the flavor of the bread will not be appealing to consumers.\n\nDoughnuts are unhealthy, though some are less so than others. According to \"Prevention Magazine\", doughnuts made from enriched flour provide some thiamine, riboflavin, and niacin, along with some fiber, but they are high in sugar and calories. Steps to improve the healthiness of doughnuts include removing trans fats.\n\nAn important property of the dough that affects the final product is the dough's rheology. This property measures the ability of the dough to flow. It can be represented by the power law equation: τ=k.D^n where τ is the tangentic stress, k is the viscosity coefficient, D is the shear rate, and n is the flow index. Many factors affect dough rheology including the type of ingredients, the amount of the ingredients, or the force applied during mixing. Dough is usually described as a viscoelastic material, meaning that its rheology depends on both the viscosity and the elasticity. The viscosity coefficient and the flow index are unique to the type of dough being analyzed, while the tangentic stress and the shear rate are measurements obtained depending on the type force being applied to the dough.\n\nIn South Africa, an Afrikaans variation known as the \"koeksister\" is popular. Another variation, similar in name, is the Cape Malay \"koesister\" being soaked in a spiced syrup and coated in coconut. It has a texture similar to more traditional doughnuts as opposed to the Afrikaans variety. A further variation is the \"vetkoek\", which is also dough deep fried in oil. It is served with mince, syrup, honey or jam.\n\nIn Tunisia, traditional pastries similar to doughnuts are \"yo-yos\". They come in different versions both as balls and in shape of doughnuts. They are deep-fried and covered in a honey syrup or a kind of frosting. Sesame seeds are also used for flavor and decoration along with orange juice and vanilla.\n\nIn Morocco, \"Sfenj\" is a similar pastry eaten sprinkled with sugar or soaked in honey.\n\nA few sweet, doughnut-style pastries are regional in nature. Cantonese cuisine features an oval-shaped pastry called \"ngàuhleisōu\" (牛脷酥, lit. \"ox-tongue pastry\", due to its tongue-like shape).\n\nA spherical food called \"saa1 jung\" (沙翁), which is also similar to a cream puff but denser with a doughnut-like texture and usually prepared with sugar sprinkled on top, is normally available in dim sum\nCantonese restaurants. An oilier Beijing variant of this called 高力豆沙, \"gaoli dousha\", is filled with red bean paste; originally, it was made with egg white instead of dough. Many Chinese cultures make a chewy doughnut known as \"shuangbaotai\" (雙包胎), which consists of two conjoined balls of dough.\n\nChinese restaurants in the United States sometimes serve small fried pastries similar to doughnut holes with condensed milk as a sauce.\n\nChinese cuisine features long, deep-fried doughnut sticks that are often quite oily, hence their name in Mandarin, \"yóutiáo\" (油條, \"oil strips\"); in Cantonese, this doughnut-style pastry is called \"yàuhjagwái\" (油炸鬼, \"ghosts fried in oil\"). These pastries are not sweet and are often served with congee, a traditional rice porridge.\n\nIn India, an old-fashioned sweet called gulgula is made of sweetened, deep-fried flour balls. A leavening agent may or may not be used.\nIn India, there are a couple of unrelated doughnut-shaped food items. A savory, fried, ring-shaped snack called a \"vada\" is often referred to as the Indian doughnut. The \"vada\" is made from \"dal\", lentil or potato flours rather than wheat flour. In North India, it is in the form of a bulging disc called \"dahi-vada\", and is soaked in curd, sprinkled with spices and sliced vegetables, and topped with a sweet and sour chutney. In South India, a vada is eaten with \"sambar\" and a coconut chutney.\n\nSweet pastries similar to old-fashioned doughnuts called \"badushahi\" and \"jalebi\" are also popular. \"Balushahi\", also called \"badushah\", is made from flour, deep fried in clarified butter, and dipped in sugar syrup. Unlike a doughnut, \"balushahi\" is dense. A \"balushahi\" is ring-shaped, but the well in the center does not go all the way through to form a hole typical of a doughnut. \"Jalebi\", which is typically pretzel-shaped, is made by deep frying batter in oil and soaking it in sugar syrup. A variant of \"jalebi\", called \"imarti\", is shaped with a small ring in the center around which a geometric pattern is arranged.\n\nAlong with these Indian variants, typical varieties of doughnuts are also available from U.S. chains such as Krispy Kreme and Dunkin' Donuts retail outlets, as well as local brands such as Mad Over Donuts and the Donut Baker.\n\nThe Indonesian, \"donat kentang\" is a potato doughnut, a ring-shaped fritter made from flour and mashed potatoes, coated in powder sugar or icing sugar.\n\nThe Persian \"zoolbia\" and \"bamiyeh\" are fritters of various shapes and sizes coated in a sugar syrup. Doughnuts are also made in the home in Iran, referred to as doughnut, even in the plural.\n\nJelly doughnuts, known as \"sufganiyah\" (סופגניה, pl. sufganiyot סופגניות) in Israel, have become a traditional Hanukkah food in the recent era, as they are cooked in oil, associated with the holiday account of the miracle of the oil. Traditional \"sufganiyot\" are filled with red jelly and topped with icing sugar. However, many other varieties exist, with some being filled with \"dulce de leche\" (particularly common after the South American aliyah early in the 21st century).\n\nIn Japan, \"an-doughnut\" (あんドーナッツ, \"bean paste doughnut\") is widely available at bakeries. \"An-doughnut\" is similar to Germany's \"Berliner\", except it contains red azuki bean paste.\nMister Donut is one of the most popular doughnut chains in Japan. Native to Okinawa is a spheroid pastry similar to doughnuts called \"sata andagi\". \n\n\"Kuih keria\" is a hole doughnut made from boiled sweet potato that is mashed. The sweet potato mash is shaped into rings and fried. The hot doughnut is then rolled in granulated sugar. The result is a doughnut with a sugar-crusted skin.\n\n\"Sel roti\" is a Nepali homemade, ring-shaped, rice doughnut prepared during Tihar, the widely celebrated Hindu festival in Nepal. A semiliquid dough is usually prepared by adding milk, water, sugar, butter, cardamom, and mashed banana to rice flour, which is often left to ferment for up to 24 hours. A \"sel roti\" is traditionally fried in \"ghee\".\n\nDoughnuts are available at most bakeries across Pakistan. The Navaz Sharif variety, available mainly in the city of Karachi, is covered in chocolate and filled with cream, similar to a Boston cream. Doughnuts can readily be found at the many Dunkin' Donuts branches spread across Pakistan.\n\nLocal varieties of doughnuts sold by peddlers and street vendors throughout the Philippines are usually made of plain well-kneaded dough, deep-fried in refined coconut oil and sprinkled with refined (not powdered or confectioner's) sugar.\n\nNative doughnut recipes include the \"shakoy\", \"kumukunsi\", and \"binangkal\". \"Shakoy\" or \"siyakoy\" from the Visayas islands (also known as \"lubid-lubid\" in the northern Philippines) uses a length of dough twisted into a distinctive rope-like shape before being fried. The preparation is almost exactly the same as doughnuts, though there are variants made from glutinous rice flour. The texture can range from soft and fluffy, to sticky and chewy, to hard and crunchy. They are sprinkled with white sugar, but can also be topped with sesame seeds or caramelized sugar. \"Kumukunsi\" is a similar native doughnut from the Maguindanao people. It is made with rice flour, duck eggs, and sugar that is molded into rope-like strands and then fried in a loose spiral. It has the taste and consistency of a creamy pancake. \"Binangkal\" are simple fried dough balls covered in sesame seeds.\n\nIn Taiwan, \"shuāngbāotāi\" (雙胞胎, lit. \"twins\") is two pieces of dough wrapped together before frying.\n\nIn Thailand, a popular breakfast food is \"pa thong ko\", also known as Thai donuts, a version of the Chinese \"yiu ja guoy/youtiao\". Often sold from food stalls in markets or by the side of the road, these doughnuts are small, sometimes X-shaped, and sold by the bag full. They are often eaten in the morning with hot Thai tea.\n\nVietnamese varieties of doughnuts include \"bánh tiêu\",\" bánh cam\", and \"bánh rán\". \"Bánh tiêu\" is a sesame-topped, deep-fried pastry that is hallow. It can be eaten alone or cut in half and served with \"bánh bò\", a gelatinous cake, placed inside the pastry. \"Bánh cam\" is from Southern Vietnam and is a ball-shaped, deep-fried pastry coated entirely in sesame seeds and containing a mung bean paste filling. \"Bánh rán\" is from Northern Vietnam and is similar to \"bánh cam\"; however, the difference is that \"bánh rán \"is covered with a sugar glaze after being deep-fried and its mung bean paste filling includes a jasmine essence.\n\nIn Austria, doughnut equivalents are called \"Krapfen\". They are especially popular during Carneval season (Fasching), and do not have the typical ring shape, but instead are solid and usually filled with apricot jam (traditional) or vanilla cream (\"Vanillekrapfen\"). A second variant, called \"Bauernkrapfen\", probably more similar to doughnuts, are made of yeast dough, and have a thick outside ring, but are very thin in the middle.\n\nIn Belgium, the \"smoutebollen\" in Dutch, or \"croustillons\" in French, are similar to the Dutch kind of \"oliebollen\", but they usually do not contain any fruit, except for apple chunks sometimes. They are typical carnival and fair snacks and are coated with powdered sugar.\n\nDoughnuts similar to the Berliner are prepared in the northern Balkans, particularly in Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Macedonia and Serbia (\"pokladnice\" or \"krofne\"). They are also called \"krofna\", \"krafna\" or \"krafne\", a name derived from the Austrian \"Krapfen\" for this pastry. In Croatia, they are especially popular during Carneval season and do not have the typical ring shape, but instead are solid. Traditionally, they are filled with jam (apricot or plum). However, they can be filled with vanilla or chocolate cream. Another types of doughnuts are \"uštipci\" and \"fritule\". \n\nU.S.-style doughnuts are available in the Czech Republic, but before they were solid shape and filled with jelly (strawberry or peach). The shape is similar to doughnuts in Germany or Poland. They are called \"Kobliha\" (\"Koblihy\" in plural). They may be filed with nougat or with vanilla custard. There are now many fillings; cut in half or non-filled knots with sugar and cinnamon on top.\n\nIn Denmark, U.S.-style doughnuts may be found at various stores, e.g. McDonald's and most gas stations. The Berliner, however, is also available in bakeries.\n\nin Finland, a sweet doughnut is called a \"munkki\" (the word also means \"monk\") and are commonly eaten in cafés and cafeteria restaurants. It is sold cold and sometimes filled with jam (like U.S. jelly donuts) or a vanilla sauce. A ring doughnut is also known as \"donitsi\".\n\nA savory form of doughnut is the meat doughnut (in Finnish \"lihapiirakka\", or literally \"meat pie\"). Made from a doughnut mixture and deep fried, the end product is more akin to a savory doughnut than any pie known in the English-speaking world.\n\nThe French \"beignet\", literally \"bump\", is the French and New Orleans equivalent of a doughnut: a pastry made from deep-fried choux pastry.\n\nIn parts of Germany, the doughnut equivalents are called \"Berliner\" (sg. and pl.), but not in the capital city of Berlin itself and neighboring areas, where they are called \"Pfannkuchen\" (which is often found misleading by people in the rest of Germany, who use the word \"Pfannkuchen\" to describe a pancake, which is also the literal translation of it).\n\nIn middle Germany, doughnuts are called \"Kreppel\" or \"Pfannkuchen\". In southern Germany, they are also called \"Krapfen\" and are especially popular during Carnival season (\"Karneval\"/\"Fasching\") in southern and middle Germany and on New Year's Eve in northern Germany. A \"Berliner\" does not have the typical ring shape of a doughnut, but instead is solid and usually filled with jam, while a ring-shaped variant called \"Kameruner\" is common in Berlin and eastern Germany. \"Bismarcks\" and \"Berlin doughnuts\" are also found in Australia, Canada, Denmark, Finland, Switzerland and the United States. Today, U.S.-style doughnuts are also available in Germany, but are less popular than their native counterparts.\n\nIn Greece, a doughnut-like snack called \"loukoumas (λουκουμάς)\", which is spherical and soaked in honey syrup, is available. It is often served with sprinkled cinnamon and grated walnuts or sesame seeds.\n\nFánk is a sweet traditional Hungarian cake. The most commonly used ingredients are flour, yeast, butter, egg yolk, rum, salt, milk and oil for frying. The dough is allowed to rise for approximately 30 minutes, resulting in an extremely light pastry. \"Fánk\" is usually served with powdered sugar and lekvar.\n\nIt is supposed that \"Fánk\" pastry is of the same origin as German Berliner, Dutch \"oliebol\", and Polish \"pączki\".\n\nItalian doughnuts include ciambelle, krapfen, zippuli and zeppole from Calabria, maritozzi and bomboloni from Tuscany, and frittelle from Veneto.\n\nIn Lithuania, a kind of doughnut called \"spurgos\" is widely known. Some spurgos are similar to Polish pączki, but some specific recipes, such as cottage cheese doughnuts (\"varškės spurgos\"), were invented independently.\n\nIn the Netherlands, \"oliebollen\", referred to in cookbooks as \"Dutch doughnuts\", are a type of fritter, with or without raisins or currants, and usually sprinkled with powdered sugar. Variations of the recipe contain slices of apple or other fruits. They are traditionally eaten as part of New Year celebrations.\n\nIn Norway, smultring is the prevailing type of doughnut traditionally sold in bakeries, shops, and stalls. However, U.S.-style doughnuts are widely available in larger supermarkets, McDonald's restaurants, 7-elevens and bakeries. The Berliner is more common than U.S.-style doughnut, and sold in most supermarkets and bakeries alongside \"smultring\" doughnuts.\n\nIn Poland and parts of the U.S. with a large Polish community, like Chicago and Detroit, the round, jam-filled doughnuts eaten especially—though not exclusively—during the Carnival are called pączki (). Pączki have been known in Poland at least since the Middle Ages. Jędrzej Kitowicz has described that during the reign of the Augustus III under influence of French cooks who came to Poland at that time, pączki dough fried in Poland has been improved, so that pączki became lighter, spongier, and more resilient.\n\nThe Romanian dessert \"gogoși\" are fried dough balls similar to filled doughnuts. They are stuffed with chocolate, jam, cheese and other combinations and may be dusted with icing sugar.\n\nIn Russia and the other Post-Soviet countries, \"ponchiki\" (, plural form of пончик, \"ponchik\") or \"pyshki\" (, especially in St. Petersburg) are a very popular sweet doughnut, with many fast and simple recipes available in Russian cookbooks for making them at home as a breakfast or coffee pastry.\n\nIn Slovenia, a jam-filled doughnut known as \"krofi\", is very popular. It is the typical sweet during Carnival time, but is to be found in most bakeries during the whole year. The most famous \"krofi\" come from the village of Trojane in central Slovenia, and are originally filled with apricot jam filling.\n\nIn Spain, there are two different types of doughnuts. The first one, simply called \"donuts\", or more traditionally \"berlinesas\", is a U.S.-style doughnut, i.e., a deep-fried, sweet, soft, ring of flour dough.\n\nThe second type of doughnut is a traditional pastry called \"rosquilla\", made of fermented dough and fried or baked in an oven. \"Rosaquillas\" were purportedly introduced in Spain by the Romans. In Spain, there are several variants of them depending on the region where they are prepared and the time of the year they are sold. In some regions they are considered a special pastry prepared only for Easter. Although overall they are more tightly textured and less sweet than U.S.-style doughnuts, they differ greatly in shape, size and taste from one region to another.\n\nThe \"churro\" is a sweet pastry of deep-fried dough similar to a doughnut but shaped as a long, thin, ribbed cylinder rather than a ring or sphere. \"Churros\" are commonly served dusted in sugar as a snack or with a cup of hot chocolate.\n\nIn Switzerland, there are \"Zigerkrapfen\", \"Berliner\" and \"tortelli di San Giuseppe\".\n\nSimilar to the Finnish \"munkki\", the Swedish \"munk\" is a sweet doughnut commonly eaten as \"fika\" along with coffee. It is sold cold and is sometimes filled with jam (U.S. jelly) or a vanilla sauce. A ring doughnut is also known as simply \"munk\".\n\nIn Ukraine doughnuts are called \"pampushky\" (). \"Pampusky\" are made of yeast dough containing wheat, rye or bukwheat flour. Traditionally they are baked, but may also be fried. According to William Pokhlyobkin, the technology of making \"pampushky\" points to German cuisine, and these buns were possibly created by German colonists in Ukraine.\n\nIn some parts of Scotland, ring doughnuts are referred to as \"doughrings\", with the 'doughnut' name being reserved exclusively for the nut-shaped variety. Glazed, twisted rope-shaped doughnuts are known as \"yum-yums\". It is also possible to buy fudge doughnuts in certain regions of Scotland. Fillings include jam, custard, cream, sweet mincemeat, chocolate and apple. Common ring toppings are sprinkle-iced and chocolate.\n\nIn Northern Ireland, ring doughnuts are known as \"gravy rings\", \"gravy\" being an archaic term for hot cooking oil.\n\nA \"kurma\" is a small, sweet, fried cube-shaped or rectangular doughnut which originated in Eastern India but is sold in Trinidad and Tobago.\n\nA traditional Puntarenas cream-filled doughnut is round and robust, managing to keep the cream inside liquified. They are popular in Costa Rica.\n\nThe Mexican \"donas\" are similar to doughnuts, including the name; the dona is a fried-dough pastry-based snack, commonly covered with powdered brown sugar and cinnamon, white sugar or chocolate.\n\nFrosted, glazed, powdered, Boston cream, coconut, sour cream, cinnamon, chocolate, and jelly are some of the varieties eaten in the United States and Canada. Sweetening, filling, and fancy toppings are now so common that plain doughnuts are now commonly labeled and sold as \"old fashioned\".\n\nThere are also potato doughnuts (sometimes referred to as spudnuts). Doughnuts are ubiquitous in the United States and can be found in most grocery stores, as well as in specialty .\n\nA popular doughnut in Hawaii is the malasada. Malasadas were brought to the Hawaiian Islands by early Portuguese settlers, and are a variation on Portugal's filhós. They are small eggy balls of yeast dough deep-fried and coated in sugar.\n\nImmigrants have brought various doughnut varieties to the United States. To celebrate Fat Tuesday in eastern Pennsylvania, churches sell a potato starch doughnut called a Fastnacht (or Fasnacht). The treats are so popular there that Fat Tuesday is often called Fastnacht Day. The Polish doughnut, the pączki, is popular in U.S. cities with large Polish communities such as Chicago, Milwaukee, and Detroit.\n\nIn regions of the country where apples are widely grown, especially the Northeast and Midwest states, cider doughnuts are a harvest season specialty, especially at orchards open to tourists, where they can be served fresh. Cider doughnuts are a cake doughnut with apple cider in the batter. The use of cider affects both the texture and flavor, resulting in a denser, moister product. They are often coated with either granulated or powdered sugar or cinnamon sugar.\n\nIn Southern Louisiana, a popular variety of the doughnut is the beignet, a fried, square doughnut served traditionally with powdered sugar. Perhaps the most famous purveyor of beignets is New Orleans restaurant Cafe Du Monde.\n\nIn Quebec, homemade doughnuts called \"beignes de Noël\" are traditional Christmas desserts.\n\nIn Australia, the doughnut is a popular snack food. Jam doughnuts are particularly popular and a unique aspect of Australian culture, especially in Melbourne, Victoria and the Queen Victoria Market, where they are a tradition. Jam doughnuts are similar to a Berliner, but are served hot: red jam (raspberry or strawberry) is injected into the bun before it is deep-fried, and then it is coated with either sugar or sugar mixed with cinnamon as soon as it has been cooked. Jam doughnuts are sometimes also bought frozen. In South Australia, they are known as Berliner or Kitchener and often served in cafes. Popular variants include custard-filled doughnuts, and more recently Nutella-filled doughnuts.\n\nMobile vans that serve doughnuts, traditional or jam, are often seen at spectator events, markets, carnivals and fetes, and by the roadside near high-traffic areas like airports and the carparks of large shopping centres. Traditional cinnamon doughnuts are readily available in Australia from specialised retailers and convenience stores. Doughnuts are a popular choice for schools and other not-for-profit groups to cook and sell as a fundraiser.\n\nIn New Zealand, the doughnut is a popular food snack available in corner dairies. They are in the form of a long sweet bread roll with a deep cut down its long axis. In this cut is placed a long dollop of sweetened clotted cream and on top of this is a spot of strawberry jam. Doughnuts are of two varieties: fresh cream or mock cream. The rounded variety is widely available as well.\n\nIn Brazil, bakeries, grocery stores and pastry shops sell ball-shaped doughnuts popularly known as \"sonhos\" (lit. dreams). The dessert was brought to Brazil by Portuguese colonizers that had contact with Dutch and German traders. They are the equivalent of nowadays \"bolas de Berlim\" (lit. balls of Berlin) in Portugal, but the traditional Portuguese yellow cream was substituted by local dairy and fruit products. They are made of a special type of bread filled with \"goiabada\" (guava jelly) or milk cream, and covered by white sugar.\n\n\"Berlin\" (plural \"Berlines\") doughnut is popular in Chile because of the large German community. It may be filled with jam or with \"manjar\", the Chilean version of \"dulce de leche\".\n\nPeruvian cuisine includes picarones which are doughnut-shaped fritters made with a squash and sweet potato base. These snacks are almost always served with a drizzle of sweet molasses-based sauce.\n\nThe doughnut has made an appearance in popular culture, particularly in the United States and Australia. References extend to objects or actions that are doughnut-shaped.\nDonut King is Australia's largest retailer of doughnuts. A Guinness Book of Records largest doughnut made up of 90,000 individual doughnuts was set in Sydney in 2007 as part of a celebration for the release of \"The Simpsons Movie\".\n\nPer capita, Canadians consume the most doughnuts, and Canada has the most doughnut stores per capita. Tim Hortons is the most popular Canadian doughnut and coffee franchise, and one of the most successful quick service restaurants in the country. In the Second City Television sketch comedy \"The Great White North\" featuring the fictional brothers Bob and Doug MacKenzie and in their film Strange Brew, doughnuts play a role in the duo's comedy.\n\nWithin the United States, the Providence metropolitan area was cited as having the most doughnut shops per capita (25.3 doughnut shops per 100,000 people) as of January 13, 2010. National Doughnut Day celebrates the doughnut's history and role in popular culture. There is a race in Staunton, Illinois, featuring doughnuts, called Tour de Donut.\n\nIn film, the doughnut has inspired \"Dora's Dunking Doughnuts\" (1933), \"The Doughnuts\" (1963) and . In video games, the doughnut has appeared in games like \"The Simpsons Game\" and \"Donut Dilemma\". In the cartoon \"Mucha Lucha\", there are four things that make up the code of mask wrestling: honor, family, tradition, and doughnuts. Also, in the television sitcom \"The Simpsons\", Homer Simpson's love affair with doughnuts makes a prominent ongoing joke as well as the focal point of more than a few episodes. There is also a children's book \"Arnie the Doughnut\" and music albums \"The Doughnut in Granny's Greenhouse\" and \"Desert Doughnuts\".\n\nIn several media, doughnuts are frequently presented as enjoyed by police officers during coffee break. This cliché has been parodied in the film \"\", where Officer Zed is instructing new recruits how to \"properly\" consume their doughnuts with coffee. It is also parodied in the television series \"Twin Peaks\", where the police station is always in large supply. In the video game \"Neuromancer\" there is a \"Donut World\" shop, where only policemen are allowed. During a citywide \"lockdown\" after the Boston Marathon bombings, a handful of selected Dunkin' Donuts locations were ordered to remain open to serve police and first responders despite the closing of the vast majority of city businesses.\n\nCops & Doughnuts, a doughnut shop in Clare, Michigan, is notable for being owned and operated by current and former members of the city's police precinct.\n\n"}
{"id": "75065", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75065", "title": "Hummus", "text": "Hummus\n\nHummus (, , or ; , 'chickpeas'; full Arabic name: \"ḥummuṣ bi-ṭaḥini\" , 'chickpeas in tahini') is a Levantine dip or spread made from cooked, mashed chickpeas or other beans, blended with tahini, olive oil, lemon juice, salt, and garlic. It is popular in the Middle East and Mediterranean, as well as in Middle Eastern cuisine around the globe. It can also be found in most grocery stores in North America and Europe.\n\n\"Hummus\" comes from the Arabic word meaning \"chickpeas\", and the complete name of the prepared spread in Arabic is \"ḥummuṣ bi ṭaḥīna\" which means \"chickpeas with tahini\".\n\nSpelling of the word in English can be inconsistent. \"Hummus\" is the most common spelling in both American and British English. The spelling \"houmous\" is however common enough in British English to be also listed as a less common spelling in some UK dictionaries but not, for example, in the Cambridge online dictionary. Some US dictionaries also list other spellings such as \"humus\", \"hommus\", and \"hommos\", but not Merriam-Webster, for example.\n\nAlthough there are a number of different theories and claims of origins in various parts of the Middle East, there is insufficient evidence to determine the precise location or time of the invention of hummus. Its basic ingredients—chickpeas, sesame, lemon, and garlic—have been combined and eaten in the Levant over centuries. Though chickpeas were widely eaten in the region, and they were often cooked in stews and other hot dishes, puréed chickpeas eaten cold with tahini do not appear before the Abbasid period in Egypt and the Levant.\n\nThe earliest known written recipes for a dish resembling \"hummus bi tahina\" are recorded in cookbooks written in Cairo in the 13th century. A cold purée of chickpeas with vinegar and pickled lemons with herbs, spices, and oil, but no tahini or garlic, appears in the \"Kanz al-Fawa'id fi Tanwi' al-Mawa'id\"; and a purée of chickpeas and tahini called \"hummus kasa\" appears in the \"Kitab Wasf al-Atima al-Mutada\": it is based on puréed chickpeas and tahini, and acidulated with vinegar (though not lemon), but it also contains many spices, herbs, and nuts, and no garlic. It is also served by rolling it out and letting it sit overnight, which presumably gives it a very different texture from \"hummus bi tahina\".\n\nAs an appetizer and dip, hummus is scooped with flatbread, such as pita. It is also served as part of a meze or as an accompaniment to falafel, grilled chicken, fish, or eggplant. Garnishes include chopped tomato, cucumber, coriander, parsley, caramelized onions, sautéed mushrooms, whole chickpeas, olive oil, hard-boiled eggs, paprika, sumac, ful, olives, pickles, and pine nuts. Outside the Middle East, it is sometimes served with tortilla chips or crackers.\n\n\"Hummus ful\" (pronounced ) is topped with a paste made from fava beans boiled until soft and then crushed. \"Hummus msabbaha/mashawsha\" is a mixture of hummus paste, warm chickpeas, and tahini.\n\nHummus is a popular dip in Egypt where it is eaten with pita, and frequently flavored with cumin or other spices.\n\nFor Palestinians and Jordanians, hummus has long been a staple food, often served warm, with bread for breakfast, lunch or dinner. All of the ingredients in hummus are easily found in Palestinian gardens, farms and markets, thus adding to the availability and popularity of the dish. In Palestine, hummus is usually garnished, with olive oil, \"\"nana\"\" mint leaves, paprika, and parsley. A related dish popular in Palestine and Jordan is \"laban ma' hummus\" (\"yogurt and chickpeas\"), which uses yogurt in the place of tahini and butter in the place of olive oil and is topped with pieces of toasted bread.\n\nHummus is a common part of everyday meals in Israel. It is made from ingredients that, following Kashrut (Jewish dietary laws), can be combined with both meat and dairy meals. Jewish immigrants arriving from Europe in the late 19th and early 20th century adopted much of the local Palestinian cuisine, including hummus, though it traditionally has been part of the cuisine of the Mizrahi Jews who lived in Arabic-speaking lands. The many Mizrahi Jewish immigrants from these countries brought their own unique variations, such as hummus with fried eggplant and boiled eggs prepared by Iraqi Jews, and \"Hasa Al Hummus\", a chickpea soup preferred by Moroccans. The Yemenite quarter of Tel Aviv is known for its hummus with traditional \"skhug\" hot sauce. More recently, African immigrants have brought specialties such as Sudanese Hummus Darfur, with eggs, tomatoes, and grated cheese. Arab Israelis and Jews alike seek out authentic hummus in Arab \"hummusia\", restaurants specializing in hummus, making famous such Arab villages as Abu Gosh and Kafr Yasif. Enthusiasts travel to the more remote Arab and Druze villages in the northern Galilee region in search of the perfect hummus experience.\n\nAlthough sometimes criticized as Jewish appropriation of Palestinian and Arab culture, hummus has been adopted as an unofficial \"national dish\" of Israel, reflecting its huge popularity and significance among the entire Israeli population. Many restaurants run by Mizrahi Jews and Arab citizens of Israel are dedicated to warm hummus, which may be served as chick peas softened with baking soda along with garlic, olive oil, cumin and tahini. One of the hummus versions available is \"msabbaha\", made with lemon-spiked tahini garnished with whole chick peas, a sprinkling of paprika and a drizzle of olive oil.\n\nOne author calls hummus, \"One of the most popular and best-known of all Syrian dishes\" and a \"must on any mezzeh table.\" Syrians in Canada's Arab diaspora prepare and consume hummus along with other dishes like falafel, kibbeh and tabbouleh, even among the third- and fourth-generation offspring of the original immigrants.\n\nIn Cyprus, hummus is part of the local cuisine in both Turkish Cypriot and Greek Cypriot communities where it is called \"humoi\" (). In Turkey, hummus is considered as a meze and usually oven-dried with pastırma, which differs from the traditional serving.\n\nChickpeas, the main ingredient of conventional hummus, have appreciable amounts of dietary fiber, protein, B vitamins, manganese and other nutrients.\n\nAs hummus recipes vary, so does nutritional content, depending primarily on the relative proportions of chickpeas, tahini, and water. Hummus provides roughly 170 calories for 100 grams, and is a good to excellent (more than 10% of the Daily Value) source of dietary fiber, B vitamins, and several dietary minerals.\n\nFat content, mostly from tahini and olive oil, is about 14% of the total; other major components are 65% water, 17% total carbohydrates, including a small amount of sugar, and about 10% protein.\n\nIn 2006, hummus was present in 12 percent of American households, rising to 17 percent by early 2009. One commentator attributed the growth of hummus to America’s embrace of ethnic and exotic foods.\n\nWhile in 2006–08 when some 15 million Americans consumed hummus, and annual national sales were about $5 million, sales growth in 2016 was reflected by an estimated 25% of US households consuming hummus. By 2016, the leading American hummus manufacturer, Sabra Dipping Company, held a 62% market share for hummus sales in the United States, and was forecast to exceed $1 billion in sales in 2017. To meet the rising consumer demand for hummus, American farmers increased their production of chickpeas four-fold since 2009, harvesting more than in 2015, an increase from in 2009. Hummus consumption has been so popular, many tobacco farmers have switched to growing chickpeas to meet demand.\n\nIn October 2008, the Association of Lebanese Industrialists petitioned to the Lebanese Ministry of Economy and Trade to request protected status from the European Commission for hummus as a uniquely Lebanese food, similar to the Protected Geographical Status rights held over regional food items by various European Union countries. As of late 2009, the Lebanese Industrialists Association was still \"collecting documents and proof\" to support its claim.\n\nThe 2005 short film West Bank Story features a rivalry between two fictional restaurants, the Israeli \"Kosher King\" and the Palestinian \"Hummus Hut\". A parody of \"West Side Story\", which is itself an adaptation of \"Romeo and Juliet\", the film won the 2006 Academy Award for Best Live Action Short Film. In 2012, Australian filmmaker Trevor Graham released a documentary, \"Make Hummus Not War\", on the political and gastronomic aspects of hummus.\n\nIn May 2010, the Guinness World Record for the largest dish of hummus in the world returned to Lebanon. The winning dish, cooked by 300 cooks in the village of al-Fanar, near Beirut, weighed approximately , more than double the weight of the previous record. According to local media, the recipe included eight tons of boiled chick peas, two tonnes of tahini, two tonnes of lemon juice, and of olive oil.\n\n"}
{"id": "75515", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75515", "title": "Porridge", "text": "Porridge\n\nPorridge (also historically spelled bybienė, Bybiebė, parritch) is a food commonly eaten as a breakfast cereal dish, made by boiling ground, crushed or chopped starchy plants—typically grain—in water or milk. It is often cooked or served with added flavorings such as sugar, honey, fruit or syrup to make a sweet cereal or mixed with spices or vegetables to make a savoury dish. It is usually served hot in a bowl.\n\nThe term \"porridge\" is often used specifically for oat porridge, which is eaten for breakfast with salt, sugar, fruit, milk, cream or butter and sometimes other flavorings. Oat porridge is also sold in ready-made or partly cooked form as an instant breakfast.\n\nOther grains used for porridge include rice, wheat, barley, corn, triticale and buckwheat. Many types of porridge have their own names, such as polenta, grits and kasha.\n\nHistorically, porridge was a staple food in much of the world, including Europe and Africa. Porridge remains a staple food in many parts of Africa.\n\nPorridge is used in many cultures as a food for the sick and is often eaten by athletes in training. This includes Mercedes AMG F1 Driver Valtteri Bottas before the 2019 ROLEX Australian Grand Prix. \n\nA 2014 study by the American Journal of Clinical Nutrition found that a daily intake of at least 3 grams of oat β-glucan lowers total and low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels by 5-10% in people with normal or elevated blood cholesterol levels. β-glucan lowers cholesterol by increasing the viscosity of digesta in the small intestine, although cholesterol reduction is greater in those with higher total cholesterol and LDL cholesterol in their blood.\n\n\n\n\nOats for porridge may be whole (groats), cut into two or three pieces (called \"pinhead\", \"steel-cut\" or \"coarse\" oatmeal), ground into medium or fine oatmeal or steamed and rolled into flakes of varying sizes and thicknesses (called \"rolled oats\", the largest size being \"jumbo\"). The larger the pieces of oat used, the more textured the resulting porridge. It is said that, because of their size and shape, the body breaks steel-cut oats down more slowly than rolled oats, reducing spikes in blood sugar and making the eater feel full longer. The US \"Consumer Reports\" Web site found that the more cooking required, the stronger the oat flavor and the less mushy the texture.\n\nOats are a good source of dietary fibre; health benefits are claimed for oat bran in particular, which is part of the grain.\n\nThe oats are cooked in milk, water or a mixture of the two. Scottish traditionalists allow only oats, water and salt. Traditionally, it is left overnight on a banked-up (barely alight) cooking range or in smouldering fire ashes, possibly due to religious (sabbatarian) restrictions spreading to daily usage. There are techniques suggested by cooks, such as pre-soaking, but a comparative test documented in an article in \"The Guardian\" found very little difference in the end result.\n\nVarious flavorings can be used and can vary widely by taste and locality. Demerara sugar, golden syrup, Greek yoghurt and honey, and even langoustine tails and scallops have been employed for this purpose. A girdle of very cold milk or single cream is believed to be essential by some, traditionally served in a separate bowl to keep it cold. Glaswegians typically use canned evaporated milk and jam. Use of whisky, rum or sherry have been reported. Cooking time can be adjusted to preference, but simmering for ten minutes is typical for non-instant oatmeal. Instant oatmeal, including flavored instant oatmeal, is common and can be prepared with the application of hot water.\n\n\n\n\n\nHistorically, porridge was a staple food in much of Northern Europe, North Korea, and Russia. It was often made from barley, though other grains and yellow peas could be used, depending on local conditions. It was primarily a savoury dish, with meats, root crops, vegetables and herbs added for flavor. Porridge could be cooked in a large metal kettle over hot coals or heated in a cheaper earthenware container by adding hot stones until boiling hot. Until leavened bread and baking ovens became commonplace in Europe, porridge was a typical means of preparing cereal crops for the table.\n\nPorridge was also commonly used as prison food for inmates in the British prison system, and so \"doing porridge\" became a slang term for a sentence in prison.\n\n"}
{"id": "75698", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=75698", "title": "Texas hold 'em", "text": "Texas hold 'em\n\nTexas hold 'em (also known as Texas holdem, hold 'em, and holdem) is a variation of the card game of poker. Two cards, known as hole cards, are dealt face down to each player, and then five community cards are dealt face up in three stages. The stages consist of a series of three cards (\"the flop\"), later an additional single card (\"the turn\" or \"fourth street\"), and a final card (\"the river\" or \"fifth street\"). Each player seeks the best five card poker hand from any combination of the seven cards of the five community cards and their two hole cards. Players have betting options to check, call, raise, or fold. Rounds of betting take place before the flop is dealt and after each subsequent deal. The player who has the best hand and has not folded by the end of all betting rounds wins all of the money bet for the hand, known as the pot.\n\nTexas hold 'em is the \"H\" game featured in HORSE and in HOSE.\n\nIn Texas hold 'em, as in all variants of poker, individuals compete for an amount of money or chips contributed by the players themselves (called the pot). Because the cards are dealt randomly and outside the control of the players, each player attempts to control the amount of money in the pot based either on the hand they are holding,\nor on their prediction as to what their opponents may be holding and how they might behave.\n\nThe game is divided into a series of hands (deals); at the conclusion of each hand, the pot is typically awarded to one player (an exception in which the pot is divided between two or more is discussed below). A hand may end at the showdown, in which case the remaining players compare their hands and the highest hand is awarded the pot; that highest hand is usually held by only one player, but can be held by more in the case of a tie. The other possibility for the conclusion of a hand occurs when all but one player have folded and have thereby abandoned any claim to the pot, in which case the pot is awarded to the player who has not folded.\n\nThe objective of winning players is not to win every individual hand, but rather to make mathematically and psychologically better decisions regarding when and how much to bet, raise, call—or fold. By making such decisions to place influential bets, one can non-verbally represent or suggest holding or not-holding a certain or possible hand by either betting or not-betting pre-flop, and by venturing smaller or larger bets or raises at possibly more advantageous times, throughout the stages of the hand being dealt. One's pattern of betting may encourage opponents to bet or to fold (in this complex process, called bluffing), without verbalizing a discouraging or dishonest word. The winning poker players know how to enhance their opponents' betting and maximize their own expected gain on each round of betting, to thereby increase their long-term winnings.\n\nAlthough little is known about the invention of Texas hold 'em, the Texas Legislature officially recognizes Robstown, Texas, as the game's birthplace, dating it to the early 1900s.\n\nAfter the game spread throughout Texas, hold 'em was introduced to Las Vegas in 1963 at the California Club by Corky McCorquodale. The game became popular and quickly spread to the Golden Nugget, Stardust and Dunes. In 1967, a group of Texan gamblers and card players, including Crandell Addington, Doyle Brunson, and Amarillo Slim were playing in Las Vegas. This is when \"ace high\" was changed from the original form in which aces were low. Addington said the first time he saw the game was in 1959. \"They didn't call it Texas hold 'em at the time, they just called it hold 'em.… I thought then that if it were to catch on, it would become the game. Draw poker, you bet only twice; hold 'em, you bet four times. That meant you could play strategically. This was more of a thinking man's game.\"\n\nFor several years the Golden Nugget Casino in Downtown Las Vegas was the only casino in Las Vegas to offer the game. At that time, the Golden Nugget's poker room was \"truly a 'sawdust joint,' with…oiled sawdust covering the floors.\" Because of its location and decor, this poker room did not receive many rich drop-in clients, and as a result, professional players sought a more prominent location. In 1969, the Las Vegas professionals were invited to play Texas hold 'em at the entrance of the now-demolished Dunes Casino on the Las Vegas Strip. This prominent location, and the relative inexperience of poker players with Texas hold 'em, resulted in a very remunerative game for professional players.\n\nAfter a failed attempt to establish a \"Gambling Fraternity Convention\", Tom Moore added the first ever poker tournament to the Second Annual Gambling Fraternity Convention held in 1969. This tournament featured several games including Texas hold 'em. In 1970, Benny and Jack Binion acquired the rights to this convention, renamed it the World Series of Poker, and moved it to their casino, Binion's Horseshoe, in Las Vegas. After its first year, a journalist, Tom Thackrey, suggested that the main event of this tournament should be no-limit Texas hold 'em. The Binions agreed and ever since no-limit Texas hold 'em has been played as the main event. Interest in the main event continued to grow steadily over the next two decades. After receiving only eight entrants in 1972, the numbers grew to over one hundred entrants in 1982, and over two hundred in 1991.\n\nDuring this time, B & G Publishing Co., Inc. published Doyle Brunson's revolutionary poker strategy guide, \"Super/System\". Despite being self-published and priced at $100 in 1978, the book revolutionized the way poker was played. It was one of the first books to discuss Texas hold 'em, and is today cited as one of the most important books on this game. In 1983, Al Alvarez published \"The Biggest Game in Town\", a book detailing a 1981 World Series of Poker event. The first book of its kind, it described the world of professional poker players and the World Series of Poker. Alvarez's book is credited with beginning the genre of poker literature and with bringing Texas hold 'em (and poker generally) to a wider audience.\nAlvarez's book was not the first book about poker. \"The Education of a Poker Player\" by Herbert O. Yardley, a former U.S. government code breaker, was published in 1957.\n\nInterest in hold 'em outside of Nevada began to grow in the 1980s as well. Although California had legal card rooms offering draw poker, Texas hold 'em was deemed to be prohibited under a statute that made illegal the (now unheard of) game \"stud-horse\". But in 1988 Texas hold 'em was declared legally distinct from stud-horse in \"Tibbetts v. Van De Kamp\". Almost immediately card rooms across the state offered Texas hold 'em. (It is often presumed that this decision ruled that hold 'em was a game of skill,<ref name=\"Skill\">See, e.g., \n"}
{"id": "76723", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=76723", "title": "Chocolate chip cookie", "text": "Chocolate chip cookie\n\nA chocolate chip cookie is a drop cookie that originated in the United States and features chocolate chips or chocolate morsels as its distinguishing ingredient. Circa 1938, Ruth Graves Wakefield added chopped up bits from a Nestlé semi-sweet chocolate bar into a cookie.\n\nThe traditional recipe starts with a dough composed of butter and both brown and white sugar, semi-sweet chocolate chips and vanilla. Variations on the recipe may add other types of chocolate, as well as additional ingredients such as nuts or oatmeal. There are also vegan versions with the necessary ingredient substitutions, such as vegan chocolate chips, vegan margarine, egg substitute, and so forth. A \"chocolate chocolate chip cookie\" uses a dough flavored with chocolate, before chocolate chips are mixed in.\n\nThe chocolate chip cookie was invented by the American chef Ruth Graves Wakefield and chef Sue Brides in 1938. She invented the recipe during the period when she owned the Toll House Inn, in Whitman, Massachusetts. In this era, the Toll House Inn was a popular restaurant that featured home cooking. It is often incorrectly reported that she accidentally developed the cookie, and that she expected the chocolate chunks would melt, making chocolate cookies. In fact, she stated that she deliberately invented the cookie. She said, \"We had been serving a thin butterscotch nut cookie with ice cream. Everybody seemed to love it, but I was trying to give them something different. So I came up with Toll House cookie.\" She added chopped up bits from a Nestlé semi-sweet chocolate bar into a cookie. The original recipe in \"Toll House Tried and True Recipes\" is called \"Toll House Chocolate Crunch Cookies.\"\n\nWakefield's cookbook, \"Toll House Tried and True Recipes\", was first published in 1936 by M. Barrows & Company, New York. The 1938 edition of the cookbook was the first to include the recipe \"Toll House Chocolate Crunch Cookie\" which rapidly became a favorite cookie in American homes.\n\nDuring WWII, soldiers from Massachusetts who were stationed overseas shared the cookies they received in care packages from back home with soldiers from other parts of the United States. Soon, hundreds of soldiers were writing home asking their families to send them some Toll House cookies, and Wakefield was soon inundated with letters from around the world requesting her recipe. Thus began the nationwide craze for the chocolate chip cookie. The recipe for chocolate chip cookies was brought to the UK in 1956, with Maryland Cookies one of the UK's best selling chocolate chip cookies.\n\nEvery bag of Nestlé chocolate chips sold in North America has a variation (butter vs. margarine is now a stated option) of her original recipe printed on the back.\n\nThe original recipe was passed down to Sue Brides' daughter, Peg. In a 2017 interview, she shared the original recipe:\n[The Tried and True Recipes cook book specifies \"2 bars (7 oz.) Nestlé's yellow label chocolate, semi-sweet, which has been cut in pieces the size of a pea.\"]\n\nAlthough the Nestlé's Toll House recipe is widely known, every brand of chocolate chips, or \"semi-sweet chocolate morsels\" in Nestlé parlance, sold in the U.S. and Canada bears a variant of the chocolate chip cookie recipe on its packaging. Almost all baking-oriented cookbooks will contain at least one type of recipe.\n\nPractically all commercial bakeries offer their own version of the cookie in packaged baked or ready-to-bake forms. There are at least three national (U.S./North America) chains that sell freshly baked chocolate chip cookies in shopping malls and standalone retail locations. Several businesses—including Doubletree hotels—offer freshly baked cookies to their patrons to differentiate themselves from their competition.\n\nTo honor the cookie's creation in the state, on July 9, 1997, Massachusetts designated the chocolate chip cookie as the Official State Cookie, after it was proposed by a third-grade class from Somerset, Massachusetts.\n\nChocolate chip cookies are commonly made with white sugar; brown sugar; flour; a small portion of salt; eggs; a leavening agent such as baking powder; a fat, typically butter or shortening; vanilla extract; and semi-sweet chocolate pieces. Some recipes also include milk or nuts (such as chopped walnuts) in the dough.\n\nDepending on the ratio of ingredients and mixing and cooking times, some recipes are optimized to produce a softer, chewy style cookie while others will produce a crunchy/crispy style. Regardless of ingredients, the procedure for making the cookie is fairly consistent in all recipes: First, the sugars and fat are creamed, usually with a wooden spoon or electric mixer. Next, the eggs and vanilla extract are added followed by the flour and leavening agent. Depending on the additional flavoring, its addition to the mix will be determined by the type used: peanut butter will be added with the wet ingredients while cocoa powder would be added with the dry ingredients. The titular ingredient, chocolate chips, as well as nuts are typically mixed in towards the end of the process to minimize breakage, just before the cookies are scooped and positioned on a cookie sheet. Most cookie dough is baked, although some eat the dough as is, or use it as an addition to vanilla ice cream to make chocolate chip cookie dough ice cream.\n\nThe texture of a chocolate chip cookie is largely dependent on its fat composition and the type of fat used. A study done by Kansas State University showed that carbohydrate based fat-replacers were more likely to bind more water, leaving less water available to aid in the spread of the cookie while baking. This resulted in softer, more cake-like cookies with less spread.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "77120", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77120", "title": "Aquafina", "text": "Aquafina\n\nAquafina is a brand of purified bottled water products produced by PepsiCo, consisting of both unflavored and flavored water. The Aquafina brand name is also licensed for use on multiple skin care products, including lip balm and wrinkle cream. It was first distributed in Wichita, Kansas in 1994, before becoming more widely sold across the United States, Spain, Canada, Lebanon, Turkey, the GCC countries, Iran, Egypt, Vietnam, Pakistan, and India to compete with The Coca-Cola Company's Dasani and Dr. Pepper Snapple's Deja Blue. As of 2009, Aquafina represented 13.4 percent of domestic bottled water sales in the United States, making it the number one bottled water brand as measured by retail sales.\n\nAquafina Pure Water, the primary unflavored product produced under the Aquafina brand, is derived from local municipal tap water sources and goes through a purification process that incorporates reverse osmosis, ultraviolet, and ozone sterilization. Beginning on July 27, 2007, a disclaimer was added to each bottle of Aquafina, stating the water comes from a \"public source\". In Canada, the current bottle of water displays \"Demineralized Treated Water\". In response to concerns amongst environmental advocates who raised questions over the disclosure of water sources, a PepsiCo spokeswoman stated, \"if this helps clarify the fact that the water originates from public sources, then it's a reasonable thing to do.\"\n\nFlavored variations are also produced under the Aquafina brand name – all of which are labeled as containing no calories and no carbohydrates. \"Aquafina FlavorSplash\", first introduced in 2005, is a flavored water product line which is non-carbonated and artificially sweetened with Sucralose. As of 2011, it is produced in six flavors: Grape, Strawberry Kiwi, Wild Berry, Raspberry, Lemon, and Peach Mango. \"Aquafina Sparkling\" is a carbonated line of flavored water; however its production was discontinued in the U.S. in late 2010. Other former products included \"Aquafina Alive\" (a low calorie, vitamin-enhanced water beverage introduced in 2007 and discontinued in 2009) and \"Aquafina plus+\" (a low calorie flavored water labeled as a vitamin supplement) – both of which have been discontinued in the U.S. As of 2011, the \"Sparkling\" and \"plus+\" lines were still in production in other markets such as Canada.\n\nAquafina is distributed in , , , , , bottles. The bottled water industry has drawn criticism for the production and distribution of plastic product packaging, which consumes additional petrochemicals.\n\nThe packaging has evolved from its original iteration for the purpose of partially offsetting environmental impacts of production and shipment. This has primarily involved packaging weight reduction. The weight of Aquafina bottles was reduced by approximately 50%, to , with a packaging redesign in 2009 which, according to the company, resulted in the use of 75 million fewer pounds of plastic during the production process.\n\nSince shortly after its inception, the promotion of Aquafina has involved sports sponsorships. As of 2011, it is listed as being an official sponsor of Major League Soccer, the Professional Golf Association, the Arizona Diamondbacks,the Carolina Panthers and the New York Giants. Its packaging also states that it is the \"official water of Major League Baseball\", which has been the case since the beginning of the 2008 MLB season. In NASCAR, it is a sponsor for Hendrick Motorsports and Kasey Kahne.\n\nCharles Joyce and James Voigt won a $1.26 billion judgment against PepsiCo after saying that the company had created Aquafina by stealing their idea to sell purified bottled water. This judgment was vacated on November 6, 2009, when it was discovered that PepsiCo had failed to respond to the lawsuit due to a misplacement of the paperwork.\n\n"}
{"id": "77355", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77355", "title": "Shellsort", "text": "Shellsort\n\nShellsort, also known as Shell sort or Shell's method, is an in-place comparison sort. It can be seen as either a generalization of sorting by exchange (bubble sort) or sorting by insertion (insertion sort). The method starts by sorting pairs of elements far apart from each other, then progressively reducing the gap between elements to be compared. Starting with far apart elements, it can move some out-of-place elements into position faster than a simple nearest neighbor exchange. Donald Shell published the first version of this sort in 1959. The running time of Shellsort is heavily dependent on the gap sequence it uses. For many practical variants, determining their time complexity remains an open problem.\n\nShellsort is a generalization of insertion sort that allows the exchange of items that are far apart. The idea is to arrange the list of elements so that, starting anywhere, considering every \"h\"th element gives a sorted list. Such a list is said to be \"h\"-sorted. Equivalently, it can be thought of as \"h\" interleaved lists, each individually sorted. Beginning with large values of \"h\", this rearrangement allows elements to move long distances in the original list, reducing large amounts of disorder quickly, and leaving less work for smaller \"h\"-sort steps to do. If the list is then \"k-sorted\" for some smaller integer \"k\", then the list remains \"h\"-sorted. Following this idea for a decreasing sequence of \"h\" values ending in 1 is guaranteed to leave a sorted list in the end.\n\nAn example run of Shellsort with gaps 5, 3 and 1 is shown below.\n\nThe first pass, 5-sorting, performs insertion sort on five separate subarrays (\"a\", \"a\", \"a\"), (\"a\", \"a\", \"a\"), (\"a\", \"a\"), (\"a\", \"a\"), (\"a\", \"a\"). For instance, it changes the subarray (\"a\", \"a\", \"a\") from (62, 17, 25) to (17, 25, 62). The next pass, 3-sorting, performs insertion sort on the three subarrays (\"a\", \"a\", \"a\", \"a\"), (\"a\", \"a\", \"a\", \"a\"), (\"a\", \"a\", \"a\", \"a\"). The last pass, 1-sorting, is an ordinary insertion sort of the entire array (\"a\"..., \"a\").\n\nAs the example illustrates, the subarrays that Shellsort operates on are initially short; later they are longer but almost ordered. In both cases insertion sort works efficiently.\n\nShellsort is not stable: it may change the relative order of elements with equal values. It is an adaptive sorting algorithm in that it executes faster when the input is partially sorted.\n\nUsing Marcin Ciura's gap sequence, with an inner insertion sort.\ngaps = [701, 301, 132, 57, 23, 10, 4, 1]\n\nforeach (gap in gaps)\nThe question of deciding which gap sequence to use is difficult. Every gap sequence that contains 1 yields a correct sort (as this makes the final pass an ordinary insertion sort); however, the properties of thus obtained versions of Shellsort may be very different. Too few gaps slows down the passes, and too many gaps produces an overhead.\n\nThe table below compares most proposed gap sequences published so far. Some of them have decreasing elements that depend on the size of the sorted array (\"N\"). Others are increasing infinite sequences, whose elements less than \"N\" should be used in reverse order.\nWhen the binary representation of \"N\" contains many consecutive zeroes, Shellsort using Shell's original gap sequence makes Θ(\"N\") comparisons in the worst case. For instance, this case occurs for \"N\" equal to a power of two when elements greater and smaller than the median occupy odd and even positions respectively, since they are compared only in the last pass.\n\nAlthough it has higher complexity than the \"O\"(\"N\" log \"N\") that is optimal for comparison sorts, Pratt's version lends itself to sorting networks and has the same asymptotic gate complexity as Batcher's bitonic sorter.\n\nGonnet and Baeza-Yates observed that Shellsort makes the fewest comparisons on average when the ratios of successive gaps are roughly equal to 2.2. This is why their sequence with ratio 2.2 and Tokuda's sequence with ratio 2.25 prove efficient. However, it is not known why this is so. Sedgewick recommends to use gaps that have low greatest common divisors or are pairwise coprime.\n\nWith respect to the average number of comparisons, Ciura's sequence has the best known performance; gaps from 701 were not determined but the sequence can be further extended according to the recursive formula formula_1.\n\nTokuda's sequence, defined by the simple formula formula_2, where formula_3, formula_4, can be recommended for practical applications.\n\nThe following property holds: after \"h\"-sorting of any \"h\"-sorted array, the array remains \"h\"-sorted. Every \"h\"-sorted and \"h\"-sorted array is also (\"a\"\"h\"+\"a\"\"h\")-sorted, for any nonnegative integers \"a\" and \"a\". The worst-case complexity of Shellsort is therefore connected with the Frobenius problem: for given integers \"h\"..., \"h\" with gcd = 1, the Frobenius number \"g\"(\"h\"..., \"h\") is the greatest integer that cannot be represented as \"a\"\"h\"+ ... +\"a\"\"h\" with nonnegative integer \"a\"..., \"a\". Using known formulae for Frobenius numbers, we can determine the worst-case complexity of Shellsort for several classes of gap sequences. Proven results are shown in the above table.\n\nWith respect to the average number of operations, none of the proven results concerns a practical gap sequence. For gaps that are powers of two, Espelid computed this average as formula_5. Knuth determined the average complexity of sorting an \"N\"-element array with two gaps (\"h\", 1) to be formula_6. It follows that a two-pass Shellsort with \"h\" = Θ(\"N\") makes on average \"O\"(\"N\") comparisons/inversions/running time. Yao found the average complexity of a three-pass Shellsort. His result was refined by Janson and Knuth: the average number of comparisons/inversions/running time made during a Shellsort with three gaps (\"ch\", \"cg\", 1), where \"h\" and \"g\" are coprime, is formula_7 in the first pass, formula_8 in the second pass and formula_9 in the third pass. \"ψ\"(\"h\", \"g\") in the last formula is a complicated function asymptotically equal to formula_10. In particular, when \"h\" = Θ(\"N\") and \"g\" = Θ(\"N\"), the average time of sorting is \"O\"(\"N\").\n\nBased on experiments, it is conjectured that Shellsort with Hibbard's gap sequence runs in \"O\"(\"N\") average time, and that Gonnet and Baeza-Yates's sequence requires on average 0.41\"N\"ln\"N\"(ln ln\"N\"+1/6) element moves. Approximations of the average number of operations formerly put forward for other sequences fail when sorted arrays contain millions of elements.\n\nThe graph below shows the average number of element comparisons in various variants of Shellsort, divided by the theoretical lower bound, i.e. log\"N\"!, where the sequence 1, 4, 10, 23, 57, 132, 301, 701 has been extended according to the formula formula_11.\n\nApplying the theory of Kolmogorov complexity, Jiang, Li, and Vitányi proved the following lower bound for the order of the average number of operations/running time in a \"p\"-pass Shellsort: Ω(\"pN\") when \"p\"≤log\"N\" and Ω(\"pN\") when \"p\">log\"N\". Therefore, Shellsort has prospects of running in an average time that asymptotically grows like \"N\"log\"N\" only when using gap sequences whose number of gaps grows in proportion to the logarithm of the array size. It is, however, unknown whether Shellsort can reach this asymptotic order of average-case complexity, which is optimal for comparison sorts. The lower bound was improved by Vitányi for every number of passes formula_12 to \nformula_13\nwhere formula_14. This result implies for example the Jiang-Li-Vitányi lower bound for all formula_12-pass increment sequences and improves that lower bound for particular increment sequences. In fact all bounds (lower and upper) currently known for the average case are precisely matched by this lower bound. For example, this gives the new result that\nthe Janson-Knuth upper bound is matched by the resulting lower bound for the used increment sequence, showing that three pass Shellsort for this increment sequence uses formula_16 comparisons/inversions/running time.\nThe formula allows us to search for increment sequences that yield lower bounds which are unknown; for example an increment sequence for four passes which has a lower\nbound greater than formula_17 for the \nincrement sequence\nformula_18. The lower bound becomes\nformula_19\n\nThe worst-case complexity of any version of Shellsort is of higher order: Plaxton, Poonen, and Suel showed that it grows at least as rapidly as formula_20.\n\nShellsort performs more operations and has higher cache miss ratio than quicksort. However, since it can be implemented using little code and does not use the call stack, some implementations of the qsort function in the C standard library targeted at embedded systems use it instead of quicksort. Shellsort is, for example, used in the uClibc library. For similar reasons, an implementation of Shellsort is present in the Linux kernel.\n\nShellsort can also serve as a sub-algorithm of introspective sort, to sort short subarrays and to prevent a slowdown when the recursion depth exceeds a given limit. This principle is employed, for instance, in the bzip2 compressor.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "77528", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=77528", "title": "Jolt Cola", "text": "Jolt Cola\n\nJolt Cola is a carbonated soft drink produced by The Jolt Company, Inc. (later known as Wet Planet Beverages). The cola drink was created in 1985 by C. J. Rapp as a highly caffeinated beverage. It was targeted towards students and young professionals, stressing its use as a stimulant in a similar manner as energy drinks. Its slogan reads \"All the sugar, twice the caffeine!\"\n\nJolt Cola was a beverage originally made by The Jolt Company, Inc. of Rochester, New York. From the outset, Jolt's marketing strategy centered on the caffeine content, billing the drink as a means to promote wakefulness. The initial slogan was \"All the sugar and twice the caffeine;\" this slogan survived for 24 years. This slogan was changed to \"Maximum caffeine, more power.\"\n\nIn the fall of 1987, the company began marketing a low calorie version, called Jolt 25, which was sweetened with a mixture of sugar and NutraSweet (a brand of aspartame), and had 25 calories per can. Jolt Cola later diversified into additional flavors named Cherry Bomb, Citrus Climax, Orange Blast, White Lightning (grape), Red Eye, and Electric Blue.\n\nIn 2003, the name was licensed to a Hackensack, New Jersey, company named Gumrunners, Inc., which manufactures a line of caffeinated gum and mints bearing the Jolt label and the slogan \"Chew More, Do More.\" The gum comes in two flavors: Spearmint and Icy Mint.\n\nIn 2005, Jolt Cola revamped its product line. Jolt Cola changed its logo, and came in \"battery bottles\" (that resemble the shape of a AA battery) which make a loud popping sound when opened. The cans are resealable aluminum bottles; the body of the bottle was similar to that of a standard aluminum can, but the top had a twist-off aluminum cap with a plastic gasket liner, and in smaller \"Quick Fix\" cans ( single-use pull-tab aluminum cans, similar to those used for Red Bull) and \"battery\" cans ( resealable aluminum cans with the same twist-off top as the battery bottles). The Jolt Cola website claimed that the \"Quick Fix\" sizes were available at establishments that serve \"adult beverages,\" for use as a mixer. The flavors of Jolt offered were also changed. Flavors offered were Cola, Blue Raspberry, Cherry Bomb (cherry cola), Silver (lemon-lime), Wild Grape, Orange Blast, Passionfruit (featuring a yellow can) and Ultra (a diet drink with Splenda as its artificial sweetener alongside guarana, ginseng, taurine, and vitamin B complex).\n\nThe Jolt Company filed for bankruptcy in 2009 following a pricing dispute with the supplier for its distinctive cans.\n\nIn August 2017, Geek.com confirmed that Jolt Cola would return at Dollar General stores in September 2017. The current version of Jolt Cola is produced for ECC Jolt, LLC, a New York City-based company.\n\nSince 2009, Jolt Cola and related flavors have been rebranded as Jolt Energy. Jolt Energy Drink comes in multiple flavors: Power Cola, Orange Burst, Wired Grape, Blue Bolt (blue raspberry), Blue Zero Carb, Cherry Bomb, Ultra and Silver. The company now also manufactures and markets a line of caffeinated chewing gums in various flavors, they are marketed under the brand-name Jolt Energy Gum.\n\nJolt Cola is still packaged in glass bottles under license by the 7 Up bottling company of California. These are sold on the West Coast, where laws are stricter to encourage use of refillable bottles.\n\nJolt Cola is also manufactured under license in Australia, Sweden and formerly (and briefly) in the United Kingdom and the Philippines. The German and Swedish supplier uses the old logos, branding and formulation, and only sells the original flavor. Jolt Cola is also available in the Netherlands and Finland. However, Jolt Cola Netherlands is a subsidiary of Jolt Cola Germany.\n\nIn Ireland, Jolt Cola was sold in bottles in most Eurospars and Dunnes Stores. It was very popular at universities.\n\nIn Sweden and The Netherlands, Jolt Cola is heavily associated with LAN parties. Desperate fans of the drink paid SEK37.50 (over US$4.00) per can when it was thought that Jolt would be discontinued in 2010.\n\nIn Australia, (\"bottled under the authority of the Jolt Company Inc. by Jolt Corporation Australia Pty Ltd, 1 Barrpowell Rd Welland\" South Australia) Jolt is sold in the traditional cola flavor, as well as lime, root beer, cream soda, and orange flavors. It generally comes in bottles, with 190 mg of caffeine. In 2006 bottle capacities were reduced to (in some cases, without vendors being aware of the change). With a caffeine concentration of 47 mg per 100 ml, these bottles contain 282 mg.\n\nIn Canada and India, Jolt Cola is not available; however, Thums Up, a similar product made by the Hindustan Coca-Cola Beverages Pvt. Ltd., can be found in India (and some Indian stores in Canada). In the 1980s and 1990s, Cott licensed and distributed the brand in Canada, primarily to colleges and universities and the surrounding communities.\n\nJolt Cola was also available in Japan in the late 1980s and early 1990s, through the local distributorship of UCC Ueshima Coffee Co.\n\nIn the Philippines, Cosmos Bottling Corporation, makers of Sarsi and Pop Cola, entered into a licensing agreement in 1995 to manufacture and distribute Jolt Cola. The license was terminated in 2001 after Cosmos was acquired by Coca-Cola Bottlers Philippines, Inc.\n\nIn the mid-1990s, it also made headway into Pakistan, but could not survive the competition. Jolt was redistributed after the formula was modified by RG Cola distributor Eduardo Sanchez and Victoria Lambert.\n\nThe Jolt Awards are annual awards given since 1991 by \"Dr. Dobb's Journal\". The awards logo is modeled on the old Jolt Cola logo and have served Jolt Cola at the event.\n\n"}
{"id": "78056", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=78056", "title": "Sausage", "text": "Sausage\n\nA sausage is a cylindrical meat product usually made from ground meat, often pork, beef, or veal, along with salt, spices and other flavourings, and breadcrumbs, encased by a skin. Typically, a sausage is formed in a casing traditionally made from intestine, but sometimes from synthetic materials. Sausages that are sold raw are cooked in many ways, including pan-frying, broiling and barbecuing. Some sausages are cooked during processing and the casing may then be removed.\n\nSausage making is a traditional food preservation technique. Sausages may be preserved by curing, drying (often in association with fermentation or culturing, which can contribute to preservation), smoking, or freezing. Some cured or smoked sausages can be stored without refrigeration. Most fresh sausages must be refrigerated or frozen until they are cooked.\n\nSausages come in a huge range of national and regional varieties, which differ by their flavouring or spicing ingredients (garlic, peppers, wine, etc.), the meat(s) used in them and their manner of preparation.\nThe word \"sausage\" was first used in English in the mid-15th century, spelled \"sawsyge\". This word came from Old North French \"saussiche\" (Modern French \"saucisse\")\". The French word came from Vulgar Latin \"salsica\" (sausage), from \"salsicus\" (seasoned with salt).\n\nSausage making is an outcome of efficient butchery. Traditionally, sausage makers would salt various tissues and organs such as scraps, organ meats, blood, and fat to help preserve them. They would then stuff them into tubular casings made from the cleaned intestines of the animal, producing the characteristic cylindrical shape. Hence, sausages, puddings, and salami are among the oldest of prepared foods, whether cooked and eaten immediately or dried to varying degrees.\n\nAn Akkadian cuneiform tablet records a dish of intestine casings filled with some sort of forcemeat.\n\nThe Chinese sausage \"làcháng\", which consists of goat and lamb meat, was first mentioned in 589 BC.\n\nThe Greek poet Homer mentioned a kind of blood sausage in the \"Odyssey\", Epicharmus wrote a comedy titled \"The Sausage\", and Aristophanes' play \"The Knights\" is about a sausage vendor who is elected leader. Evidence suggests that sausages were already popular both among the ancient Greeks and Romans, and most likely with the various tribes occupying the larger part of Europe.\n\nThe most famous sausage in ancient Italy was from Lucania (modern Basilicata) and was called \"lucanica\", a name which lives on in a variety of modern sausages in the Mediterranean. During the reign of the Roman emperor Nero, sausages were associated with the Lupercalia festival. Early in the 10th century during the Byzantine Empire, Leo VI the Wise outlawed the production of blood sausages following cases of food poisoning.\n\nTraditionally, sausage casings were made of the cleaned intestines, or stomachs in the case of haggis and other traditional puddings. Today, however, natural casings are often replaced by collagen, cellulose, or even plastic casings, especially in the case of industrially manufactured sausages. Some forms of sausage, such as sliced sausage, are prepared without a casing. Additionally, luncheon meat and sausage meat are now available without casings in tin cans and jars.\n\nA sausage consists of meat cut into pieces or ground, mixed with other ingredients, and filled into a casing. Ingredients may include a cheap starch filler such as breadcrumbs, seasoning and flavourings such as spices, and sometimes others such as apple and leek. The meat may be from any animal, but is often pork, beef, or veal. The lean meat-to-fat ratio depends upon the style and producer. The meat content as labelled may exceed 100%; which happens when the weight of meat exceeds the total weight of the sausage after it has been made, sometimes including a drying process which reduces water content.\n\nIn some jurisdictions foods described as sausages must meet regulations governing their content. For example, in the United States The Department of Agriculture specifies that the fat content of different defined types of sausage may not exceed 30%, 35% or 50% by weight; some sausages may contain binders or extenders.\n\nMany traditional styles of sausage from Asia and mainland Europe use no bread-based filler and include only meat (lean meat and fat) and flavorings. In the United Kingdom and other countries with English cuisine traditions, many sausages contain a significant proportion of bread and starch-based fillers, which may comprise 30% of ingredients. The filler in many sausages helps them to keep their shape as they are cooked. As the meat contracts in the heat, the filler expands and absorbs moisture and fat from the meat.\n\nWhen the food processing industry produces sausages for a low price point, almost any part of the animal can end up in sausages, varying from cheap, fatty specimens stuffed with meat blasted off the carcasses (mechanically recovered meat, MRM) and rusk. On the other hand, the finest quality contain only choice cuts of meat and seasoning. In Britain, \"meat\" declared on labels could in the past include fat, connective tissue, and MRM. These ingredients may still be used, but must be labelled as such, and up to 10% water may be included without being labelled.\n\nSausages are emulsion-type products. They are composed of solid fat globules, dispersed in protein solution. The proteins function by coating the fat and stabilizing them in water.\n\nSausages classification is subject to regional differences of opinion. Various metrics such as types of ingredients, consistency, and preparation are used. In the English-speaking world, the following distinction between \"fresh\", \"cooked\", and \"dry\" sausages seems to be more or less accepted:\n\nThe distinct flavor of some sausages is due to fermentation by \"Lactobacillus\", \"Pediococcus\", or \"Micrococcus\" (added as starter cultures) or natural flora during curing.\n\nOther countries use different systems of classification. Germany, for instance, which produces more than 1200 types of sausage, distinguishes \"raw\", \"cooked\" and \"precooked\" sausages.\n\nIn Italy, the basic distinctions are:\n\nThe United States has a particular shelf stable type called pickled sausages, commonly sold in establishments such as gas stations and delicatessens. These are usually smoked or boiled sausages of a highly processed hot dog or kielbasa style plunged into a boiling brine of vinegar, salt, spices, and often a pink coloring, then canned in Mason jars. They are usually packaged in single blister packs or jars.\n\nCertain countries classify sausage types according to the region in which the sausage was traditionally produced:\n\nMany nations and regions have their own characteristic sausages, using meats and other ingredients native to the region and employed in traditional dishes.\n\nMerguez is a red, spicy sausage from Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia and Libya, North Africa. It is also popular in France, Israel, and the German state of Saarland, where it is often grilled on a Schwenker. Merguez is made with lamb, beef, or a mixture of both. It can be flavored with a wide range of spices, such as sumac for tartness, and paprika, Cayenne pepper, or harissa, a hot chili paste that gives it a red color. It is stuffed into a lamb casing, rather than a pork casing. It is traditionally made fresh and eaten grilled or with couscous. Sun-dried merguez is used to add flavor to tagines. It is also eaten in sandwiches.\n\nIn South Africa, traditional sausages are known as \"boerewors\", or farmer's sausage. Ingredients include game and beef, usually mixed with pork or lamb and with a high percentage of fat. Coriander and vinegar are the two most common seasoning ingredients, although many variations exist. The coarsely-ground nature of the meat as well as the long continuous spiral of sausage are two of its recognisable qualities. Boerewors is traditionally cooked on a \"braai\" (barbecue).\n\nDroë wors is an uncooked sausage similar to boerewors made in a dry-curing process similar to biltong. A local variant of the hot dog is the \"Wors roll\", or boerewors roll. This is a hotdog bun with a piece of boerewors in, served with a tomato and onion relish called \"seshebo\". Seshebo can include chilli, atchaar or curries, depending on the area within the country.\n\nA European-style smoked savory \"hóng cháng\" ( \"red sausage\") is produced in Harbin, China's northernmost major city. It is similar to Lithuanian and Polish sausages including kiełbasa and \"podhalańska\", and tends to have a more European flavour than other Chinese sausages. This kind of sausage was first produced in a Russian-capitalized factory named Churin sausage factory in 1909. Harbin-style sausage has become popular in China, especially in northern regions.\n\nLap cheong (also lap chong, lap chung, lop chong) are dried pork sausages that look and feel like pepperoni, but are much sweeter. In southwestern China, sausages are flavored with salt, red pepper and wild pepper. People often cure sausages by smoking and air drying.\n\nAlthough Japan is not traditionally known for beef, pork, venison, or even blood sausages, the Japanese do consume a fish-based log called kamaboko, which could be considered a type of sausage. Kamaboko is made with cured ground fish paste called surimi. It is usually shaped into half-moons on top of a small plank of wood and the outside dyed pink. When the kamaboko is cut into slices it appears to have an unmistakable pink rind which surrounds a white interior. It is often cut into thin slices and added to soups, salads, bento, and many other dishes as a garnish.\nIn recent years, kamaboko has also entered the market as a snack food. Similar to the Slim Jim, cheese, sausage, and fish flavored kamaboko sticks can be found in convenience stores across Japan.\n\nSundae, a form of blood sausage, is a traditional Korean sausage. A popular street food, sundae is normally prepared by steaming or boiling cow or pig intestines stuffed with various ingredients. The most common variation is composed of pork blood, cellophane noodle, sliced carrot and barley stuffed into pig intestines, but other regional variations include squid or Alaska pollock casings. Sundae is eaten plain with salt, in stews, or as part of a stir-fry.\n\nIn the Philippines, sausages are generally called \"longaniza\" (Filipino: \"longganisa\") in the northern regions and \"chorizo\" (Visayan: \"choriso\", \"tsoriso\" or \"soriso\") in the southern regions. They are usually fresh or smoked sausages, distinguished primarily by either being sweet (\"jamonado\" or \"hamonado\") or garlicky (\"de recado\" or \"derecado\"). There are numerous kinds of sausages in the Philippines, usually unique to a specific region like Vigan longganisa, Alaminos longganisa, and Chorizo de Cebu. Bulk sausage versions are also known in Philippine English as \"skinless sausages\". There are also a few dry sausages like Chorizo de Bilbao and Chorizo de Macao. Most Filipino sausages are made from pork, but they can also be made from chicken, beef, or even tuna.\n\nThere are many varieties of sausages known to Thai cuisine, some of which are specialities of a specific region of Thailand. From northern Thailand comes \"sai ua\", a grilled minced pork sausage flavored with curry paste and fresh herbs. Another grilled sausage is called \"sai krok Isan\", a fermented sausage with a distinctive slightly sour taste from northeastern Thailand (the region also known as Isan). Both sausages are commonly eaten with sticky rice, fresh vegetables, and a fresh \"nam phrik\" (Thai chilli paste) or some raw bird's eye chilies. They might also be served together with a refreshing Thai salad such as \"som tum\" (green papaya salad).\n\nAlso very popular in Thailand is \"naem\", a raw fermented pork sausage similar to the Vietnamese \"nem chua\" and Laotian \"som moo\". This variety of sausage is often encountered as \"yam naem\" and \"naem khluk\", both of which are Thai salads. Adopted from Vietnam comes \"mu yo\". It is somewhat similar in taste and texture to liverwurst and, served with a \"nam chim\" (Thai dipping sauce), a popular snack in Thailand. It too can be used as an ingredient for Thai salads and as a meat ingredient in, for instance, Thai soups. \"Kun chiang\" is a dry and sweet Chinese sausage which has also been incorporated into the Thai culinary culture. Known as \"lap cheong\" by Cantonese, in Thailand it is most often used, again, as an ingredient for a Thai salad, \"yam kun chiang\", one that is normally only eaten together with \"khao tom kui\", a plain rice congee. A host of modern, factory-made, sausages have become popular as snacks in recent years. These most often resemble hot-dogs and frankfurters and are commonly sold grilled or deep-fried at street stalls, and served with a sweet, sticky and slightly spicy soy-based sauce.\n\nIn Turkey, sausage is known as \"sosis\", which is made of beef. Sucuk (pronounced tsudjuck or sujuk with accent on the last syllable) is a type of sausage made in Turkey and neighboring Balkan countries. There are many types of sucuk, but it is mostly made from beef. It is fermented, spiced (with garlic and pepper) and filled in an inedible casing that needs to be peeled off before consuming. Slightly smoked sucuk is considered superior. The taste is spicy, salty and a little raw, similar to pepperoni. Some varieties are extremely hot and/or greasy. Some are \"adulterated\" with turkey, water buffalo meat, sheep fat or chicken. There are many dishes made with sucuk, but grilled sucuk remains the most popular. Smoke dried varieties are consumed \"raw\" in sandwiches. An intestinal loop is one sucuk. Smoked sucuk is usually straight.\n\nIn the UK and Ireland, sausages are a very popular and common feature of the national diet and popular culture. British sausages and Irish sausages are normally made from raw (i.e., uncooked, uncured, unsmoked) pork, beef, venison or other meats mixed with a variety of herbs and spices and cereals, many recipes of which are traditionally associated with particular regions (for example Cumberland sausages). They normally contain a certain amount of rusk or bread-rusk, and are traditionally cooked by frying, grilling or baking. They are most typically long, the filling compressed by twisting the casing into concatenated \"links\" into the sausage skin, traditionally made from the prepared intestine of the slaughtered animal; most commonly a pig.\n\nDue to their habit of often exploding due to shrinkage of the tight skin during cooking, they are often referred to as \"bangers\", particularly when served with the most common accompaniment of mashed potatoes to form a bi-national dish known as bangers and mash.\n\nFamously, they are an essential component of a full English or Irish breakfast. Some are made to traditional regional recipes such as those from Cumberland or Lincolnshire, and increasingly to modern recipes which combine fruit such as apples or apricots with the meat, or are influenced by other European styles such as the Toulouse sausage or chorizo. Vegetarian sausages are also now very widely available, although traditional meatless recipes such as the Welsh \"Selsig Morgannwg\" also exist.\n\nA popular and widespread snack is the sausage roll made from sausage-meat rolled in puff pastry; they are sold from most bakeries and often made at home. Sausages may be baked in a Yorkshire pudding batter to create \"toad in the hole\", often served with gravy and onions, or they may be cooked with other ingredients in a sausage casserole. In most areas, \"sausage meat\" for frying and stuffing into poultry or other meats is sold as ground, spiced meat without casing. Battered sausage, consisting of a sausage dipped in batter, and fried, is sold throughout Britain from Fish and Chip shops. In England, the saveloy is a type of pre-cooked sausage, larger than a typical hot-dog, which is served hot. A saveloy skin was traditionally colored with bismarck-brown dye giving saveloy a distinctive bright red color.\n\nA thin variety of sausage, known as the chipolata is often wrapped in bacon and served alongside roast turkey at Christmas time and are known as Pigs in a Blanket or \"Pigs in Blankets\". They are also served cold at children's parties throughout the year. The word derives from the Italian \"cipolatta\", \"onioned\" or made with onion, although its meaning has been forgotten and it need not contain onion. Black pudding, white pudding and Hog's pudding are fairly similar to their Scottish and European counterparts. Following concerns about health and user preference (distaste for horsemeat), heightened by the BSE crisis in the 1990s and the 2013 horsemeat scandal, the quality of the meat content in many British sausages improved with a return to the artisanal production of high quality traditional recipes, which had previously been in decline. However, many cheaper sausages contain mechanically recovered meat or meat slurry, which must be so listed on packaging.\n\nThere are various laws concerning the meat content of sausages in the UK. The minimum meat content to be labelled Pork Sausages is 42% (30% for other types of meat sausages), although to be classed as meat, the Pork can contain 30% fat and 25% connective tissue. Often the cheapest supermarket pork sausages do not have the necessary meat content to be described as \"pork sausages\" and are simply labelled \"sausages\"; with even less meat content they are described as \"bangers\" (an unregulated name). These typically contain MRM which was previously included in meat content, but under later EU law cannot be so described.\n\nFor Scotland, see below.\n\nLukanka (луканка) is a spicy salami sausage unique to Bulgarian cuisine. It is similar to sujuk, but often stronger flavored.\n\nKulen is a type of flavored sausage made of minced pork that is traditionally produced in Croatia (Slavonia) and Serbia (Vojvodina), and its designation of origin has been protected. The meat is low-fat, rather brittle and dense, and the flavor is spicy. The red paprika gives it aroma and color, and garlic adds spice. The original kulen recipe does not contain black pepper because its hot flavor comes from hot red paprika.\n\nOther types of sausages in Serbia include Sremska, Požarevačka, and Sudžuk. And other types of sausages in Croatia include Češnjovka (Garlic Sausage) and Krvavica (a variation on Blood Sausage).\n\n\"See the section Nordic countries below\"\n\nThe generic word for sausage in Finnish is \"makkara\". Several types of Finnish makkara are similar in appearance to Polish sausages or bratwursts, but have a very different taste and texture. Most makkara have very little spice and are therefore frequently eaten with mustard, ketchup, or other table condiments without a bun. Makkara is usually grilled, roasted over coals or open fire, steamed (called \"höyrymakkara\") or cooked on sauna heating stones.\n\n\"Nakki\" is a tinier edition of makkara. There are many types of nakki, with almost as much varieties as larger types of makkara. The closest relative to nakki in North-American cuisine is the thin knackwurst. \"Siskonmakkara\", a finely ground light-colored sausage, is usually encountered as the main ingredient of a soup named \"siskonmakkarakeitto\". Another variety is \"mustamakkara\", lit. black sausage, a specialty of Tampere. It is a type of blood sausage similar to the Scottish black pudding. A Finnish speciality is \"ryynimakkara\", a low-fat sausage which contains groats. Pickled makkara, intended to be consumed as slices, is called \"kestomakkara\". This class includes various mettwurst, salami and Balkanesque styles. The most popular kestomakkara in Finland is \"meetvursti\" (etymologically this word comes from \"mettwurst\"), which contains finely ground full meat, ground fat and various spices. It is not unlike salami, but usually thicker and less salty. \"Meetvursti\" used to additionally contain horse meat, but hardly any brands contain it anymore, mostly due to the high cost of production. In general, there is no taboo against eating horse meat in Nordic countries, but the popularity has decreased with decreasing availability of suitable horse meat. There is also makkara and meetvursti with game, like deer, moose or reindeer meat. Even a \"lohimakkara\", i.e., salmon sausage, exists. In Finland there are b- and a-classes of BBQ Sausages like Kabanossi, Camping and HK Sininen Lenkki, Blue Loop.\n\nWhen a thick slice of a thick (diameter about ) makkara is fried and put together with cucumber salad and other fillings between two slices of toast, it becomes a \"porilainen\", named after the town of Pori.\n\nSaucisson is perhaps one of the most popularized forms of dried sausage in France, with many different variations from region to region. Usually saucisson contains pork, cured with a mixture of salt, wine and/or spirits. Regional varieties sometimes contain more unorthodox ingredients such as nuts and fruits. Other French sausages include the diot and various types of boudin.\n\nThe French language makes a difference between \"saucisse\" and \"saucisson\", where the former is usually meant to bake, and the latter is a dried sausage. However, the saucisse is only popular near the Germanic border (Belgium, Switzerland, regions near Germany, ...), and won't be found often in the centre of France.\n\nFor the enormous variety of German sausages follow the specific links on the \n\nGerman sausages include Frankfurters/Wieners, Bratwürste, Rindswürste, Knackwürste, and Bockwürste. Currywurst, a dish of sausages with curry sauce, is a popular fast food in Germany.\n\nLoukaniko is the common Greek word for pork sausage, but in English it refers specifically to Greek sausages flavored with orange peel, fennel seed and other herbs.\n\nHungarian sausages, when smoked and cured, are called kolbász – different types are often distinguished by their typical regions, e.g. \"gyulai\" and \"csabai\" sausage. As no collective word for \"sausage\" in the English sense exists in Hungarian, local salamis (see e.g. winter salami) and boiled sausages \"hurka\" are often not considered when listing regional sausage varieties. The most common boiled sausages are rice liver sausage (\"Májas Hurka\") and blood sausage (\"Véres Hurka\"). In the first case, the main ingredient is liver, mixed with rice stuffing. In the latter, the blood is mixed with rice, or pieces of bread rolls. Spices, pepper, salt and marjoram are added.\n\n\"See the section Nordic countries below\"\n\nItalian sausages (\"salsiccia\" – plural \"salsicce\") are often made of pure pork. Sometimes they may contain beef. Fennel seeds and chilli are generally used as the primary spices in the South of Italy, while in the center and North of the country black pepper and garlic are more often used. In Apulia \"salsiccia\" is called \"zampina\" (plural \"zampine\").\n\nA different type of sausage that is popular in Italy, found in many varieties, is \"salame\" (plural ), made from coarsely ground meat (pork or beef) mixed with fat, salted and dried. Spices are added as for \"salsiccia\". \"Salami\" are ready-to-eat as purchased; typically, they are sliced thinly for consumption and eaten cold, for instance as \"salumi\".\n\nMacedonian sausages (\"kolbas, lukanec\") are made from fried pork, onions, and leeks, with herbs and spices.\n\nMaltese sausage (\"Maltese\": \"Zalzett tal-Malti\") is made of pork, sea salt, black peppercorns, coriander seeds and parsley. It is short and thick in shape and can be eaten grilled, fried, stewed, steamed or even raw when freshly made. A barbecue variety is similar to the original but with a thinner skin and less salt.\n\nDutch and Belgian cuisine is not known for its abundant use of sausages in its traditional dishes. Nevertheless, the Dutch have a number of sausage varieties, such as the \"rookworst\" (smoked sausage) and the dried \"slagersworst\" (lit. \"butchers sausage\") mostly found at the specialist butcher shops and still made by hand and spiced following traditionally family recipes. Another common variety in the Netherlands is the \"runderworst\" which is made from beef and the dried sausage known as \"metworst\" or \"droge worst\". The Dutch 's name might suggest its being a variant of the German-style bratwurst, but this is not the case; it is more closely related to the well-known Afrikaner Boerewors.\n\nNordic sausages (, , , ) are usually made of 60–80% very finely ground pork, very sparsely spiced with pepper, nutmeg, allspice or similar sweet spices (ground mustard seed, onion and sugar may also be added). Water, lard, rind, potato starch flour and soy or milk protein are often added for binding and filling. In southern Norway, grill and wiener sausages are often wrapped in a \"lompe\", a potato flatbread somewhat similar to a \"lefse\".\n\nVirtually all sausages will be industrially precooked and either fried or warmed in hot water by the consumer or at the hot dog stand. Since hot dog stands are ubiquitous in Denmark (known as \"Pølsevogn\") some people regard \"pølser\" as one of the national dishes, perhaps along with medisterpølse, a fried, finely ground pork and bacon sausage. The most noticeable aspect of Danish boiled sausages (never the fried ones) is that the casing often contains a traditional bright-red dye. They are also called \"wienerpølser\" and legend has it they originate from Vienna where it was once ordered that day-old sausages be dyed as a means of warning.\n\nThe traditional Swedish \"falukorv\" is a sausage made of a grated mixture of pork and beef or veal with potato flour and mild spices, similarly red-dyed sausage, but about 5 cm thick, usually baked in the oven coated in mustard or cut in slices and fried. The sausage got its name from Falun, the city from where it originates, after being introduced by German immigrants who came to work in the region's mines. Unlike most other ordinary sausages it is a typical home dish, not sold at hot dog stands. Other Swedish sausages include \"prinskorv\", \"fläskkorv\", \"\" and \"isterband\"; all of these, in addition to \"falukorv\", are often accompanied by potato mash or \"rotmos\" (a root vegetable mash) rather than bread. \"Isterband\" is made of pork, barley groats and potato and is lightly smoked.\n\nIn Iceland, lamb may be added to sausages, giving them a distinct taste. Horse sausage and mutton sausage are also traditional foods in Iceland, although their popularity is waning. Liver sausage, which has been compared to haggis, and blood sausage are also a common foodstuff in Iceland.\n\n\"See the section Nordic countries above\"\n\nPolish sausages, kiełbasa, come in a wide range of styles such as swojska, krajańska, szynkowa (a ham sausage), biała, śląska, krakowska, podhalańska, kishka and others. Sausages in Poland are generally made of pork, rarely beef. Sausages with low meat content and additions like soy protein, potato flour or water binding additions are regarded as of low quality. Because of climate conditions, sausages were traditionally preserved by smoking, rather than drying, like in Mediterranean countries.\n\nSince the 14th century, Poland excelled in the production of sausages, thanks in part to the royal hunting excursions across virgin forests with game delivered as gifts to friendly noble families and religious hierarchy across the country. The extended list of beneficiaries of such diplomatic generosity included city magistrates, academy professors, voivodes, szlachta and kapituła. Usually the raw meat was delivered in winter, but the processed meat, throughout the rest of the year. With regard to varieties, early Italian, French and German influences played a role. Meat commonly preserved in fat and by smoking was mentioned by historian Jan Długosz in his annals:\"Annales seu cronici incliti regni Poloniae\" The \"Annales\" covered events from 965 to 1480, with mention of the hunting castle in Niepołomice along with King Władysław sending game to Queen Zofia from Niepołomice Forest, the most popular hunting ground for the Polish royalty beginning in the 13th century.\n\nEmbutidos (or enchidos) and linguiça generally contain hashed meat, particularly pork, seasoned with aromatic herbs or spices (pepper, red pepper, paprika, garlic, rosemary, thyme, cloves, ginger, nutmeg, etc.).\n\nHaggis is generally recognized as the national dish, although not described as a sausage. A popular breakfast food is the square sausage. This is normally eaten as part of a full Scottish breakfast or on a Scottish morning roll. The sausage is produced in a rectangular block and individual portions are sliced off. It is seasoned mainly with pepper. It is rarely seen outside Scotland and in fact is still fairly uncommon in the Highlands. Other types of sausage include black pudding, similar to the German and Polish blood sausages. Stornoway black pudding is held in high regard and measures are currently being taken to bring it under EU geographical protection. Additionally a popular native variety of sausage is the red pudding. It is usually served in chip shops, deep fried in batter and with chips as a red pudding supper.\n\nIn Spain, fresh sausages, \"salchichas\", which are eaten cooked, and cured sausages, \"embutidos\", which are eaten uncooked, are two distinct categories. Among the cured sausages are found products like chorizo, salchichón, and sobrasada. Blood sausage, morcilla, is found in both cured and fresh varieties. They are made with pork meat and blood, usually adding rice, garlic, paprika and other spices. There are many regional variations, and in general they are either fried or cooked in cocidos.\n\nFresh sausage may be red or white. Red sausages contain paprika (pimentón in Spanish) and are usually fried; they can also contain other spices such as garlic, pepper or thyme. The most popular type of red sausage is perhaps \"txistorra\", a thin and long paprika sausage originating in Navarre. White sausages do not contain paprika and can be fried, boiled in wine, or, more rarely, in water.\n\"See the section Nordic countries above\"\n\nThe cervelat, a cooked sausage, is often referred to as Switzerland's national sausage. A great number of regional sausage specialties exist as well.\n\nIn most of Latin America, a few basic types of sausages are consumed, with slight regional variations on each recipe. These are \"chorizo\" (raw, rather than cured and dried like its Spanish namesake), \"longaniza\" (usually very similar to \"chorizo\" but longer and thinner), \"morcilla\" or \"relleno\" (blood sausage), and \"salchichas\" (often similar to hot dogs or Vienna sausages). Beef tends to be more predominant than in the pork-heavy Spanish equivalents.\n\nIn Argentina and Uruguay, many sausages are consumed. Eaten as part of the traditional \"asado\", \"chorizo\" (beef and/or pork, flavored with spices) and \"morcilla\" (blood sausage or black pudding) are the most popular. Both share a Spanish origin. One local variety is the \"salchicha argentina\" (Argentine sausage), \"criolla\" or \"parrillera\" (literally, barbecue-style), made of the same ingredients as the chorizo but thinner. There are hundreds of salami-style sausages. Very popular is the \"salame tandilero\", from the city of Tandil. Other types include \"longaniza\", \"cantimpalo\" and \"soppressata\".\n\nVienna sausages are eaten as an appetizer or in hot dogs (called panchos), which are usually served with different sauces and salads. Leberwurst is usually found in every market. Weisswurst is also a common dish in some regions, eaten usually with mashed potatoes or \"chucrut\" (sauerkraut).\n\n\"Longaniza\" is the most common type of sausage, or at least the most common name in Chile for sausages that also could be classified as chorizo. The Chilean variety is made of four parts pork to one part bacon (or less) and seasoned with finely ground garlic, salt, pepper, cumin, oregano, paprika and chilli sauce. The cities of Chillán and San Carlos are known among Chileans for having the best \"longanizas\".\n\nAnother traditional sausage is the \"prieta\", the Chilean version of blood sausage, generally known elsewhere in Latin America as \"morcilla\". In Chile, it contains onions, spices and sometimes walnut or rice and is usually eaten at \"asados\" or accompanied by simple boiled potatoes. It sometimes has a very thick skin so is cut open lengthwise before eating. \"Vienesa\"s or Vienna sausages are also very common and are mainly used in the \"completo\", the Chilean version of the hot dog.\n\nA grilled chorizo served with a buttered \"arepa\" is one of the most common street foods in Colombia. Butifarras Soledeñas are sausages from Soledad, Atlántico, Colombia. In addition to the standard Latin American sausages, dried pork sausages are served cold as a snack, often to accompany beer drinking. These include \"cábanos\" (salty, short, thin, and served individually), \"butifarras\" (of Catalan origin; spicier, shorter, fatter and moister than cábanos, often eaten raw, sliced and sprinkled with lemon juice) and \"salchichón\" (a long, thin and heavily processed sausage served in slices).\n\nThe most common Mexican sausage by far is \"chorizo\". It is fresh and usually deep red in color (in most of the rest of Latin America, chorizo is uncolored and coarsely chopped). Some chorizo is so loose that it spills out of its casing as soon as it is cut; this crumbled \"chorizo\" is a popular filling for torta sandwiches, eggs, breakfast burritos and tacos. \"Salchichas\", \"longaniza\" (a long, thin, lightly spiced, coarse chopped pork sausage), moronga (a type of blood pudding) and head cheese are also widely consumed.\n\nIn El Salvador, chorizos are quite common, and the ones from the city of Cojutepeque are particularly well known there. The links, especially of those from Cojutepeque, are separated with corn husks tied in knots (see photo). Like most chorizos in Latin America, they are sold raw, and must be cooked.\n\nNorth American breakfast or country sausage is made from uncooked ground pork, breadcrumbs and salt mixed with pepper, sage, and other spices. It is widely sold in grocery stores in a large synthetic plastic casing, or in links which may have a protein casing. It is also available sold by the pound without a casing. It can often be found on a smaller scale in rural regions, especially in southern states, where it is either in fresh patties or in links with either natural or synthetic casings as well as smoked. This sausage is most similar to English-style sausages and has been made in the United States since colonial days. It is commonly sliced into small patties and pan-fried, or cooked and crumbled into scrambled eggs or gravy. Scrapple is a pork-based breakfast meat that originated in the Mid-Atlantic States. Other uncooked sausages are available in certain regions in link form, including Italian, bratwurst, chorizo, and linguica.\n\nIn Louisiana, there is a variety of sausage that is unique to its heritage, a variant of andouille. Unlike the original variety native to Northern France, Louisiana andouille has evolved to be made mainly of pork butt, not tripe, and tends to be spicy with a flavor far too strong for the mustard sauce that traditionally accompanies French andouille: prior to casing, the meat is heavily spiced with cayenne and black pepper. The variety from Louisiana is known as Tasso ham and is often a staple in Cajun and Creole cooking. Traditionally it is smoked over pecan wood or sugar cane as a final step before being ready to eat. In Cajun cuisine, boudin is also popular. Sausages made in the French tradition are popular in Québec, Ontario, and parts of the Prairies, where butchers offer their own variations on the classics. Locals of Flin Flon are especially fond of the Saucisse de Toulouse, which is often served with poutine.\n\nHot dogs, also known as frankfurters or wieners, are the most common pre-cooked sausage in the United States and Canada. Another popular variation is the corn dog, which is a hot dog that is deep fried in cornmeal batter and served on a stick. A common and popular regional sausage in New Jersey and surrounding areas is pork roll, usually thinly sliced and grilled as a breakfast meat.\n\nOther popular ready-to-eat sausages, often eaten in sandwiches, include salami, American-style bologna, Lebanon bologna, prasky, liverwurst, and head cheese. Pepperoni and Italian sausage are popular pizza toppings.\n\nAustralian sausages have traditionally been made with beef, pork and chicken, while recently game meats such as kangaroo have been used that typically have much less fat. English style sausages, known colloquially as \"snags\", come in two varieties: thin, that resemble an English 'breakfast' sausage, and thick, known as 'Merryland' in South Australia. These types of sausage are popular at barbecues, and can be purchased from any butcher or supermarket. Devon is a spiced pork sausage similar to Bologna sausage and Gelbwurst. It is usually made in a large diameter, and often thinly sliced and eaten cold in sandwiches.\n\nMettwurst and other German-style sausages are highly popular in South Australia, often made in towns like Hahndorf and Tanunda, due to the large German immigration to the state during early settlement. Mettwurst is usually sliced, and eaten cold on sandwiches or alone as a snack. A local variation on cabanossi, developed by Italian migrants after World War II using local cuts of meat, is a popular snack at parties. The Don small goods company developed a spiced snack-style sausage based on the cabanossi in 1991 called Twiggy Sticks.\n\nSausage rolls are a popular snack and party food, as are saveloys, cheerios, and locally manufactured cabanossi. Traditional sausages similar to English bangers are eaten throughout the country; these are usually made of finely ground beef or mutton with breadcrumbs, very mildly spiced, stuffed into an edible collagen casing which crisps and splits when fried. These may be eaten for breakfast, lunch or dinner. In recent years, many international and exotic sausages have also become widely available in NZ.\n\nSausages may be served as hors d'œuvres, in a sandwich, in a bread roll as a hot dog, wrapped in a tortilla, or as an ingredient in dishes such as stews and casseroles. It can be served on a stick (like the corn dog) or on a bone as well. Sausage without casing is called \"sausage meat\" and can be fried or used as stuffing for poultry, or for wrapping foods like Scotch eggs. Similarly, sausage meat encased in puff pastry is called a \"sausage roll\".\n\nSausages are almost always fried in oil, served for any meal, particularly breakfast or lunch and often \"sweet sausages\" have been created which are made with any of the above: dried fruit, nuts, caramel and chocolate, bound with butter and sugar. These sweet sausages are refrigerated rather than fried and usually, however, served for dessert rather than as part of a savory course. Sausages can also be modified to use indigenous ingredients. Mexican styles add oregano and the \"guajillo\" red pepper to the Spanish chorizo to give it an even hotter spicy touch. Certain sausages also contain ingredients such as cheese and apple, or types of vegetable.\n\nVegetarian and vegan sausages are also available in some countries, or can be made from scratch at home. These may be made from tofu, seitan, nuts, pulses, mycoprotein, soya protein, vegetables or any combination of similar ingredients that will hold together during cooking. These sausages, like most meat-replacement products, generally fall into two categories: some are shaped, colored, flavored, and spiced to replicate the taste and texture of meat as accurately as possible; others such as the Glamorgan sausage rely on spices and vegetables to lend their natural flavor to the product and no attempt is made to imitate meat. While not vegetarian, the soya sausage was invented 1916 in Germany. First known as \"Kölner Wurst\" (\"Cologne Sausage\") by later German Chancellor Konrad Adenauer (1876–1967).\n\n\n"}
{"id": "79181", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=79181", "title": "Alectryon (mythology)", "text": "Alectryon (mythology)\n\nAlectryon (Ancient Greek: ἀλεκτρυών) is the Ancient Greek word for \"rooster\".\n\nIn Greek mythology, Alectryon was a young soldier who was assigned by Ares to stand guard outside his door while the god indulged in illicit love with Aphrodite. He fell asleep on guard duty and Helios the sun-god walked in on the couple were. Helios then alerted Hephaestus on what Ares was doing with Aphrodite. Ares punished Alectryon by turning him into a rooster which never forgets to announce the arrival of the sun in the morning by its crowing.\n\nBoth the words Alectryon and Halcyon might have been corrupted from Halaka, one of the old Persian appellations of the sun. In the 'Vendidad' it is said that the sacred bird Parodars, called by men \"kahrkatak\", raises its voice at the dawn; and in the \"Bundehasb\", the sun is spoken of as Halaka, the cock, the enemy of darkness and evil, which flee before his crowing.\n\n"}
{"id": "80293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=80293", "title": "Botifarra", "text": "Botifarra\n\nBotifarra (; ; ) is a type of sausage and one of the most important dishes of the Catalan cuisine.\n\n\"Botifarra\" is based on ancient recipes, either the Roman sausage \"botulu\" or the \"lucanica\", made of raw pork and spices, with variants today in Italy and in the Portuguese and Brazilian \"linguiça\".\n\nIn Colombia, \"Butifarras Soledeñas\" are a popular tradition in Soledad, Atlántico.\n\nSome of the most representative types are:\n\nUsually white botifarra and black botifarra do not need to be cooked, but they are sometimes boiled as an ingredient \"Escudella i carn d'olla\", a traditional dish made by boiling vegetables and meat, as well as in the Catalan way of cooking fava beans.\n\nGrilled botifarra served with white beans ( or \"botifarra amb mongetes\") is a typical Catalan dish.\n\nIn South America cooked botifarra of many types are known as \"butifarra\". In Colombia in the town of Soledad and also in Barranquilla, butifarra is a dryed, shorter, almost round version of the sausage eaten with \"bollo\" of yuca and lime juice. In Argentina and Uruguay, butifarra a is a very fatty, tender and whitish sausage much more like a cased pate, rioplatense butifarra is made with finely minced pork fat and meat that is cased in a soft sausage case and boiled. In Paraguay, \"butifarra\" is a finely minced fatty chorizo that is commonly prepared in asado.\n\n\"Butifarra\" is popular in El Salvador, also known to be found in Bolivia and Mexico. \n\nThe word \"butifarra\" In Perú, is used for a sandwich not related with any sausage at all, it is prepared with \"jamon del país\", a regional type of ham and not a botifarra.\n\n"}
{"id": "80706", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=80706", "title": "Mató", "text": "Mató\n\nMató () is a fresh cheese of Catalonia made from cows' or goats' milk, with no salt added. \n\nIt is usually served with honey, as a traditional and emblematic Catalan dessert known as \"mel i mató\". \n\"Mató\" is a whey cheese similar to non-industrial variants of the fresh cheeses known as \"Brull\" in Maestrat, Ports de Beseit and the Southern Terres de l'Ebre and as \"Brossat\" in Andorra, Pallars, Menorca, Mallorca and parts of Occitania, as well as the \"brocciu\" in Corsica and other types of curd cheese such as Italian ricotta.\n\nThe \"Mató\" from the villages near the Montserrat mountain, such as Ullastrell and Marganell, is quite famous. \n\n\"Mató\" is mentioned in the \"Sent Soví\", a 14th-century Catalan cookbook, as well as in the \"El Noi de la Mare\" local Christmas carol. It was very popular during the Middle Ages, when it was made plain or scented with orange flowers.\n\n"}
{"id": "81453", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=81453", "title": "Kahuna", "text": "Kahuna\n\nKahuna is a Hawaiian word, defined as a respectful man who has moral authority in society \"a prime person, a minister, or an expert in any profession\". \n\nA kahuna may be versed in agriculture, canoe building or any other talent. Blessing new buildings and construction projects, officiating weddings are some of the tasks a kahuna may be called upon to perform, by his or her community. \n\nForty types of kahuna are listed in the book \"Tales from the Night Rainbow\", twenty in the healing professions alone, including \"Kahuna lapaʻau, medical priest or practitioner\", and \"Kahuna hāhā, an expert who diagnoses, as sickness or pain, by feeling the body\". \n\nThere are two main categories of kahuna; craft kahuna, such as the \"kālai waa\" - an expert canoe maker, and \"hookele\" - an expert navigator; vs sorcery kahuna such as \"kahuna ʻanāanā\" and \"kahuna lapaau\" (healer).\n\nThere are different types of sorcery kahuna, which can include:\n\nExpert kahuna are called \"Kahuna Nui\" (High Priest) and Kahuna Nui lived in places such as Waimea Valley, which is known as the \"Valley of the Priests\". They were given slices of land that spanned from the mountain to the sea. Hewahewa, a direct descendant of Paʻao, was the \"Kahuna Nui\" to Kamehameha I. A contemporary, Leimomi Mo'okini Lum is a Kahuna Nui. David Kaonohiokala Bray was a well-known kahuna.\n\nKing Kamehameha IV, in his translation of the Book of Common Prayer, used the term \"Kahuna\" to refer to Anglican priests and \"Kahunapule\" to refer to both lay and ordained Anglican ministers.\n\nCraft kahuna were never prohibited; however, during the decline of native Hawaiian culture many died out and did not pass on their wisdom to new students. As an example, when the \"Hōkūle‘a\" was built to be sailed to the South Pacific to prove the voyaging capabilities of the ancient Hawaiians, master navigator Mau Piailug from Satawal was brought to Hawaii to teach the Hawaiians navigation.\n\nIt is often said that the missionaries came to Hawaii in 1820 and made kahuna practices illegal. In the 100 years after the missionaries arrived all kahuna practices were legal until 1831, some were illegal until 1863, all were legal until 1887, then some were illegal until 1919. Since 1919, all have been legal, except sorcery, which was illegal at first, but was decriminalized in 1972.\n\nThe first Christian missionaries arrived in 1820. The most powerful person in the nation, Kaʻahumanu, did not convert until 1825. But it was not until 11 years after missionaries arrived that she proclaimed laws against hula, chant, ‘awa (kava), and Hawaiian religion.\n\nThe use of the term in reference to surfing can be traced back to the 1959 film \"Gidget\", in which \"The Big Kahuna\", played by Cliff Robertson, (Martin Milner in the TV episode), was the leader of a group of surfers. The term then became commonplace in Beach Party films of the 1960s such as \"Beach Blanket Bingo\", where the \"Big Kahuna\" was the best surfer on the beach. Eventually, it was adopted into general surfing culture. Hawaiian surfing master Duke Kahanamoku may have been referred to as the \"Big Kahuna\" but rejected the term as he knew the original meaning.\n\nIn the New Age spiritual system known as Huna, which uses some Hawaiian words and concepts appropriated from Hawaiian tradition, \"kahuna\" denotes someone of priestly or shamanic standing. The prevalence of these works in pop culture have even come to influence English dictionary definitions such as Merriam-Webster, which now defines kahuna not only as \"a preeminent person or thing\" but with a secondary definition of \"Hawaiian shaman\".\n\nIn the 1999 movie \"The Big Kahuna\" salesmen are trying to get a lucrative contract with a manufacturer they refer to as the \"great kahuna\". In a fantasy scene, Kevin Spacey's character wears a headdress and is revered as \"the big kahuna\".\n\nThe term was also used by Wally Amos in his cookie business, The Cookie Kahuna.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "81963", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=81963", "title": "Chazuke", "text": "Chazuke\n\nChazuke (茶漬け, ちゃづけ) or ochazuke (お茶漬け, from (o)\"cha\" 'tea' + \"tsuke\" 'submerge') is a simple Japanese dish made by pouring green tea, dashi, or hot water over cooked rice.\n\nCommon toppings include Japanese pickles (tsukemono), umeboshi, nori (seaweed), \"furikake\", sesame seeds, \"tarako\" and \"mentaiko\" (salted and marinated pollock roe), salted salmon, shiokara (pickled seafood), scallions and wasabi.\n\nChazuke provides a good way to use leftover rice as a quick snack because this dish is easy to make. It is also known as \"cha-cha gohan\".\n\nThis dish first became popular in the Heian period, when water was most commonly poured over rice, but beginning in the Edo period, tea was often used instead.\n\nIn Kyoto, \"ochazuke\" is known as \"bubuzuke.\" \nSince the 1970s packaged \"instant ochazuke\", consisting of freeze-dried toppings and seasonings, have become popular.\n"}
{"id": "82425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82425", "title": "Sandwich", "text": "Sandwich\n\nA sandwich is a food typically consisting of vegetables, sliced cheese or meat, placed on or between slices of bread, or more generally any dish wherein two or more pieces of bread serve as a container or wrapper for another food type. The sandwich began as a portable finger food in the Western world, though over time it has become prevalent worldwide.\n\nSandwiches are a popular type of lunch food, taken to work, school, or picnics to be eaten as part of a packed lunch. The bread can be either plain, or coated with condiments such as mayonnaise or mustard, to enhance its flavour and texture. As well as being homemade, sandwiches are also widely sold in restaurants and can be served hot or cold. There are both savoury sandwiches, such as deli meat sandwiches, and sweet sandwiches, such as a peanut butter and jelly sandwich.\n\nThe sandwich is named after its supposed inventor, John Montagu, 4th Earl of Sandwich. \"The Wall Street Journal\" has described it as Britain's \"biggest contribution to gastronomy\".\n\nThe modern concept of a sandwich using slices of bread as found within the West can arguably be traced to 18th-century Europe. However, the use of some kind of bread or bread-like substance to lie under (or under \"and\" over) some other food, or used to scoop up and enclose or wrap some other type of food, long predates the eighteenth century, and is found in numerous much older cultures worldwide.\n\nThe ancient Jewish sage Hillel the Elder is said to have wrapped meat from the Paschal lamb and bitter herbs in a soft matzah—flat, unleavened bread—during Passover in the manner of a modern wrap made with flatbread. Flat breads of only slightly varying kinds have long been used to scoop or wrap small amounts of food en route from platter to mouth throughout Western Asia and northern Africa. From Morocco to Ethiopia to India, bread is baked in flat rounds, contrasting with the European loaf tradition.\n\nDuring the Middle Ages in Europe, thick slabs of coarse and usually stale bread, called \"trenchers\", were used as plates. After a meal, the food-soaked trencher was fed to a dog or to beggars at the tables of the wealthy, and eaten by diners in more modest circumstances. The immediate culinary precursor with a direct connection to the English sandwich was to be found in the Netherlands of the seventeenth century, where the naturalist John Ray observed that in the taverns beef hung from the rafters \"which they cut into thin slices and eat with bread and butter laying the slices upon the butter\"— explanatory specifications that reveal the Dutch \"belegde broodje\", open-faced sandwich, was as yet unfamiliar in England.\n\nInitially perceived as food that men shared while gaming and drinking at night, the sandwich slowly began appearing in polite society as a late-night meal among the aristocracy. The sandwich's popularity in Spain and England increased dramatically during the nineteenth century, when the rise of industrial society and the working classes made fast, portable, and inexpensive meals essential. In London, for example, at least seventy street vendors were selling ham sandwiches by 1850; during that decade sandwich bars also became an important form of eating establishment in western Holland, typically serving liver and salt beef sandwiches.\n\nIn the United States, the sandwich was first promoted as an elaborate meal at supper. By the early twentieth century, as bread became a staple of the American diet, the sandwich became the same kind of popular, quick meal as was already widespread in the Mediterranean.\n\nThe first written usage of the English word appeared in Edward Gibbon's journal, in longhand, referring to \"bits of cold meat\" as a \"Sandwich\". It was named after John Montagu, 4th Earl of Sandwich, an eighteenth-century English aristocrat. It is said that he ordered his valet to bring him meat tucked between two pieces of bread, and others began to order \"the same as Sandwich!\" It is commonly said that Lord Sandwich was fond of this form of food because it allowed him to continue playing cards, particularly cribbage, while eating, without using a fork, and without getting his cards greasy from eating meat with his bare hands.\n\nThe rumour in its familiar form appeared in Pierre-Jean Grosley's \"Londres\" (Neuchâtel, 1770), translated as \"A Tour to London\" in 1772; Grosley's impressions had been formed during a year in London in 1765. The sober alternative is provided by Sandwich's biographer, N. A. M. Rodger, who suggests Sandwich's commitments to the navy, and to politics and the arts, mean the first sandwich was more likely to have been consumed at his desk.\n\nBefore being known as sandwiches, this food combination seems to simply have been known as \"bread and meat\" or \"bread and cheese\". These two phrases are found throughout English drama from the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.\n\nIn the United States, a court in Boston, Massachusetts ruled in 2006 that a sandwich includes at least two slices of bread and \"under this definition, this court finds that the term 'sandwich' is not commonly understood to include burritos, tacos, and quesadillas, which are typically made with a single tortilla and stuffed with a choice filling of meat, rice, and beans.\" The issue stemmed from the question of whether a restaurant that sold burritos could move into a shopping centre where another restaurant had a no-compete clause in its lease prohibiting other \"sandwich\" shops.\n\nIn Spain, where the word \"sandwich\" is borrowed from the English language, it refers to a food item made with English sandwich bread. It is otherwise known as a \"bocadillo\". Similar usage applies in other Spanish-speaking cultures, such as Mexico, where the word \"torta\" is also used for a popular variety of roll-type sandwiches.\n\nIn the United Kingdom and Australia, the term \"sandwich\" is more narrowly defined than in the United States: it refers only to an item which uses sliced bread from a loaf. An item with similar fillings, but using an entire bread roll cut horizontally in half, is always referred to as a \"roll\". (In South Australia, there is a regional variant of the roll, superficially similar to a club sandwich, where the bread roll is sliced three times with parallel cuts, and filling is put in the first and third openings, but not the second. This makes the resulting double cut roll easier to handle: the top half and the bottom half are eaten separately.) Any hot item based on a bread roll is referred to as a \"burger\", never as a \"sandwich\". However, hot sliced (not ground) beef between two slices of toasted bread is referred to as a \"steak sandwich\": it is the sliced loaf bread that distinguishes the steak sandwich from a burger.\n\nThe verb \"to sandwich\" has the meaning \"to position anything between two other things of a different character, or to place different elements alternately,\" and the noun \"sandwich\" has related meanings derived from this more general definition. For example, an ice cream sandwich consists of a layer of ice cream between two layers of cake or biscuit. Similarly, Oreos and Custard Creams are described as sandwich biscuits (UK/Commonwealth) or sandwich cookies (US) because they consist of a soft filling between the baked layers.\n\nThe word \"butty\" (a reference to the fact that butter is often used in British sandwiches) is common in some northern parts of England as a slang synonym for \"sandwich\", particularly to refer to certain kinds of sandwiches including the chip butty, bacon butty, or sausage butty, though some people make the distinction that a butty is made using a single buttered slice, folded over rather than cut. \"Sarnie\" is a similar colloquialism. Likewise, the word \"sanger\" is used for sandwich in Scottish dialect. The colloquial Scottish word \"piece\" may refer either to a sandwich or to a light meal, especially one that includes a sandwich. For example, the phrase \"jeely piece\" refers to a jam sandwich.\n\nIt has been suggested that UK's first pre-made packaged sandwiches were sold by Marks & Spencer in 1980. As they proved wildly popular, a small experiment involving five stores rapidly grew to cover more than one hundred stores. Within a year, the store was looking for ways to manufacture sandwiches at an industrial scale.\nHowever, the first pre-packed sandwiches date from well before this. British Home Stores sold pre-packed sandwiches in the 1960s (see the Radio Times 3 November 2018 p.167), and earlier even than that, Marks and Spencer (Brighton branch) began selling them in the 1950s, and then in the 1960s in the Oxford Street branch, London. (See the Radio Times 10 November 2018 p.160)\n\nIn 2017, the sandwich industry made and sold £8 billion in sandwiches in the UK alone.\n\nAmong the many varieties of sandwich popular in the United States are the BLT, cheese sandwich, club sandwich, Dagwood, French dip, hamburger, Monte Cristo, muffuletta, pastrami on rye, peanut butter and jelly sandwich, cheesesteak, pilgrim, po' boy, Reuben, sloppy joe, and submarine.\n\n"}
{"id": "82776", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82776", "title": "Breakfast cereal", "text": "Breakfast cereal\n\nBreakfast cereal, or cereal, is a breakfast food made from processed cereal grains and often eaten for breakfast, primarily in Western societies. It is most often mixed with milk, but can also be eaten with yogurt or fruit. Some companies promote their products for the health benefits from eating oat-based and high-fiber cereals. In the United States, cereals are often fortified with vitamins but can also lack many of the vitamins needed for a healthy breakfast. A significant proportion of cereals are made with high sugar content. Many breakfast cereals are produced via extrusion.\nThe breakfast cereal industry has gross profit margins of 40–45%, 90% penetration in some markets, and steady and continued growth throughout its history. The number of different types of breakfast cereals in the U.S. has grown from 160 (1970) to 340 (1998); forecasted trend for 2012 was 4,945 (2012). In this highly competitive market, breakfast cereal companies have developed cereals in an ever-increasing number of flavors. Although many plain wheat and oat based cereals exist, other flavors are sweet. Some of the most popular brands include freeze-dried fruit and others are flavored like dessert or candy.\n\nCereal, oatmeal and porridge quickly became an important breakfast component in North America. Barley was a common grain used, though other grains and yellow peas could be used. In many modern cultures, porridge is still eaten as a breakfast dish.\n\nNorth American Indians had found a way to make ground corn palatable, later called \"grits\" (from the Old English word \"grytt\", meaning coarse meal) and \"hominy\". While this became a staple in the southern U.S., grits never gained a hold in the northern states. Food reformers in the 19th century called for cutting back on excessive meat consumption at breakfast. They explored numerous vegetarian alternatives. Late in the century, the Seventh-day Adventists based in Michigan made these food reforms part of their religion, and indeed non-meat breakfasts were featured in their sanitariums and led to new breakfast cereals.\nFerdinand Schumacher, a German immigrant, began the cereals revolution in 1854 with a hand oats grinder in the back room of a small store in Akron, Ohio. His German Mills American Oatmeal Company was the nation's first commercial oatmeal manufacturer. He marketed the product locally as a substitute for breakfast pork. Improved production technology (steel cutters, porcelain rollers, improved hullers), combined with an influx of German and Irish immigrants, quickly boosted sales and profits. In 1877, Schumacher adopted the Quaker symbol, the first registered trademark for a breakfast cereal. The acceptance of \"horse food\" for human consumption encouraged other entrepreneurs to enter the industry. Henry Parsons Crowell started operations in 1882, and John Robert Stuart in 1885. Crowell cut costs by consolidating every step of the processing—grading, cleaning, hulling, cutting, rolling, packaging, and shipping —in one factory operating at Ravenna, Ohio. Stuart operated mills in Chicago and Cedar Rapids, Iowa. Stuart and Crowell combined in 1885 and initiated a price war. After a fire at his mill in Akron, Schumacher joined Stuart and Crowell to form the Consolidated Oatmeal Company.\n\nThe American Cereal Company (Quaker Oats, but see below) created a cereal made from oats in 1877, manufacturing the product in Akron, Ohio. Separately, in 1888, a trust or holding company combined the nation's seven largest mills into the American Cereal Company using the Quaker Oats brand name. By 1900 technology, entrepreneurship, and the \"Man in Quaker Garb\"—a symbol of plain honesty and reliability—gave Quaker Oats a national market and annual sales of $10 million (equivalent to $ million today).\n\nEarly in the 20th century, the Quaker Oats Company (formed in 1901 to replace the American Cereal Company) jumped into the world market. Schumacher, the innovator; Stuart, the manager and financial leader and Crowell, the creative merchandiser, advertiser, and promoter, doubled sales every decade. Alexander Anderson's steam-pressure method of shooting rice from guns created Puffed rice and puffed wheat. Crowell's intensive advertising campaign in the 1920s and 1930s featured promotions with such celebrities as Babe Ruth, Max Baer, and Shirley Temple. Sponsorship of the popular \"Rin-Tin-Tin\" and \"Sergeant Preston of the Yukon\" radio shows aided the company's expansion during the depression. Meat rationing during World War II boosted annual sales to $90 million (equivalent to $ billion today), and by 1956 sales topped $277 million ($ billion today). By 1964 the firm sold over 200 products, grossed over $500 million ($ billion today), and claimed that eight million people ate Quaker Oats each day. Expansion included acquisition of Aunt Jemima Mills Company in 1926, which continues as a leading brand of pancake mixes and syrup, the sport drink Gatorade in 1983, and in 1986, the Golden Grain Company, producers of Rice-A-Roni canned lunch food. In 2001 Quaker Oats was itself bought out by PepsiCo.\n\nThe first cold breakfast cereal, Granula, was invented in the United States in 1863 by James Caleb Jackson, operator of Our Home on the Hillside which was later replaced by the Jackson Sanatorium in Dansville, New York. The cereal never became popular, due to the inconvenient necessity of tenderizing the heavy bran and graham nuggets by soaking them overnight.\n\nGeorge H. Hoyt created Wheatena circa 1879, during an era when retailers would typically buy cereal (the most popular being cracked wheat, oatmeal, and cerealine) in barrel lots, and scoop it out to sell by the pound to customers. Hoyt, who had found a distinctive process of preparing wheat for cereal, sold his cereal in boxes, offering consumers a more sanitary and consumer-friendly option.\n\nPackaged breakfast cereals were considerably more convenient than a product that had to be cooked and as a result of this convenience (and clever marketing), they became popular. Battle Creek, Michigan was a center both of the Seventh-day Adventist Church and of innovation in the ready-to-eat cereal industry. And indeed, the church had a substantial impact on the development of cereal goods through the person of John Harvey Kellogg (1851–1943). Son of an Adventist factory owner in Battle Creek, Kellogg was encouraged by his church to train in medicine at Bellevue Hospital Medical College in New York City in 1875. After graduating, he became medical superintendent at the Western Health Reform Institute in Battle Creek, established in 1866 by the Adventists to offer their natural remedies for illness. Many wealthy industrialists came to Kellogg's sanitarium for recuperation and rejuvenation. They were accustomed to breakfasts of ham, eggs, sausages, fried potatoes, hot biscuits, hotcakes, and coffee.\n\nIn Battle Creek they found fresh air, exercise, rest, \"hydrotherapy\", a strict vegetarian diet, and abstinence from alcohol, tobacco, coffee, and tea. To supplement the center's vegetarian regimen, Kellogg experimented with granola. Soon afterwards he began to experiment with wheat, resulting in a lighter, flakier product. In 1891 he acquired a patent and then in 1895 he launched the Cornflakes brand, which overnight captured a national market. Soon there were forty rival manufacturers in the Battle Creek area. His brother William K. Kellogg (1860–1951) worked for him for many years until, in 1906, he broke away, bought the rights to Cornflakes, and set up the Kellogg Toasted Corn Flake Company. William Kellogg discarded the health food concept, opting for heavy advertising and commercial taste appeal. Later, his signature on every package became the company trademark.\n\nThe second major innovator in the cereal industry was Charles W. Post, a salesman who was admitted to Kellogg's sanitarium as a patient in the late 1800s. While there, he grew deeply impressed with their all-grain diet. Upon his release, he began experimenting with grain products, beginning with an all-grain coffee substitute called Postum. In 1898 he introduced Grape-nuts, the concentrated cereal with a nutty flavor (containing neither grapes nor nuts). Good business sense, determination, and powerful advertising produced a multimillion-dollar fortune for Post in a few years. After his death, his company acquired the Jell-O company in 1925, Baker's Chocolate in 1927, Maxwell House coffee in 1928, and Birdseye frozen foods in 1929. In 1929, the company changed its name to General Foods. In 1985, Philip Morris Tobacco Company bought General Foods for $5.6 billion (equivalent to $ billion today) and merged it with its Kraft division. Because of Kellogg and Post, the city of Battle Creek, Michigan is nicknamed the \"Cereal Capital of the World\".\n\nIn 1902 Force wheat flakes became the first ready-to-eat breakfast cereal introduced into the United Kingdom. The cereal, and the Sunny Jim character, achieved wide success in Britain, at its peak in 1930 selling 12.5 million packages in one year. In the 1930s, the first puffed cereal, Kix, went on the market. \n\nAt the 1904 World Fair, the Quaker Oats Company made a candy-coated puffed cereal, a wheat-based product similar to Cracker Jack's candy-coated popcorn. Ranger Joe, the first pre-sweetened breakfast cereal, and little more than candy-coated puffed wheat or rice, was introduced in the US in 1939.\n\nAfter World War II, the big breakfast cereal companies—now including General Mills, who entered the market in 1924 with Wheaties—increasingly started to target children. The flour was refined to remove fiber, which at the time was considered to undermine digestion and absorption of nutrients, and sugar was added to improve the flavor for children. The new breakfast cereals began to look starkly different from their ancestors. As one example, Kellogg's Sugar Smacks, created in 1953, had 56% sugar by weight. Different mascots were introduced, such as the Rice Krispies elves and later pop icons like Tony the Tiger and the Trix Rabbit.\n\nIn the 1920s, national advertising in magazines and radio broadcasts played a key role in the emergence of the fourth big cereal manufacturer, General Mills. In 1921, James Ford Bell, president of a Minneapolis wheat milling firm, began experimenting with rolled wheat flakes. After tempering, steaming, cracking wheat, and processing it with syrup, sugar, and salt, it was prepared in a pressure cooker for rolling and then dried in an electric oven. By 1925, Wheaties had become the \"Breakfast of Champions\". In 1928, four milling companies consolidated as the General Mills Company in Minneapolis. The new firm expanded packaged food sales with heavy advertising, including sponsorship of radio programs such as \"Skippy\", \"Jack Armstrong, The All-American Boy\", and baseball games. Jack Dempsey, Johnny Weissmuller, and others verified the \"Breakfast of Champions\" slogan. By 1941 Wheaties had won 12% percent of the cereal market. Experiments with the puffing process produced Kix, a puffed corn cereal, and Cheerios, a puffed oats cereal. Further product innovation and diversification brought total General Mills sales to over $500 million annually (18% in packaged foods) by the early 1950s.\n\nOver 2016 to 2017, Americans purchased 3.1 billion boxes of cereal, mostly as ready to eat cold cereal. In a $9.8 billion cereal market, cold cereal purchases were 88% of the total (12% for hot cereals), with the overall cereal market declining due to reduced consumption of sugar and dairy products. Kellogg's and General Mills each had 30% of the market share for cold cereals. Honey Nut Cheerios was the leading cold cereal.\n\nThe processing of grains is a process that helps remove the bran and germ. This process allows the grains to stay good longer, but it also removes important vitamins such as vitamin B, dietary fibers and iron. Processing is the modification of a grain or mixture of grains usually taking place in a facility remote from the location where the product is eaten. This distinguishes \"breakfast cereals\" from foods made from grains modified and cooked in the place where they are eaten.\n\nBreakfast cereals therefore often are fortified with minerals and vitamins and these additives may be regulated. For example, if breakfast cereal in Canada is fortified, they must contain the following specific amounts per 100 grams of cereal: Thiamine (2.0 mg), Niacin (4.8 mg), Vitamin B6 (0.6 mg), Folic Acid (0.06 mg), Pantothenic Acid (1.6 mg), Magnesium (160.0 mg), Iron (13.3 mg), Zinc (3.5 mg).\n\nMuesli is a breakfast cereal based on uncooked rolled oats, fruit, and nuts. It was developed around 1900 by the Swiss physician Maximilian Bircher-Benner for patients in his hospital. It is available in a packaged dry form such as Alpen, or it can be made fresh.\n\nMost warm cereals can be classified as porridges, in that they consist of cereal grains which are soaked in hot water, cooked and/or boiled to soften them and make them palatable. Sweeteners, such as brown sugar, honey, or maple syrup, are often added either by the manufacturer, during cooking, or before eating. Porridge is especially popular in Scotland, Wales, Ireland, and England. Porridge became important in Scotland due to the freezing winters. The Scottish people prefer porridge to be made with only water and salt while other prefer more creamier substances to be added. Wales had a perfect climate for cultivating oats making porridge common in Welsh households. Ireland mixes porridge with whiskey as a cure for the common cold while England references the dish to the royal family and their traditions.\n\nCommon hot cereals in parts of Canada include oatmeal, Cream of Wheat and Red River cereal. These hot cereals are typically served with maple syrup or brown sugar and milk or cream. Yogurt is also added to Red River cereal. Many Canadians also enjoy cereals similar to those in the United States market.\n\nIn China, porridges such as rice congee, or those made with other ingredients (including corn meal or millet) are often eaten for breakfast. Eating breakfast cereal has become more important in China and specifically Hong Kong, China due to the increase of work and decrease in time.\n\nIn Greece, cornmeal is poured into boiling milk to create a cereal of a thick consistency which is often served to young children. The cereal production in Greece has recently declined.\n\nIreland is known for its oatmeal. The most famous variety of these is steel-cut oatmeal. Oatmeal is a very popular breakfast in Ireland. It is one of Ireland's major culinary exports, and is widely available throughout the world. Major brands include McCann's. In the 19th and 20th century, the Irish people began to mix whiskey into porridge as a common cold remedy. Oatmeal and porridge have been very important to Ireland since the 19th century and even though they may have been cut back a little when they were introduced to potatoes, oatmeal and porridge is still highly incorporated into Irish diets.\n\nIn Russia, a breakfast is kasha, a porridge of buckwheat (, \"grechka\"), farina (, \"manka\"), or other grains. Kasha is found throughout much of Eastern Europe, including Poland and Croatia. Russia does not value breakfast cereals as much as other places. Most instances of cereal consumption is due to the desire for weight loss.\n\nPap is a porridge used in a variety of meals eaten throughout the day. In the Afrikaans culture of descendants of Dutch farmers and French Huguenots, it is usually sprinkled with sugar and then eaten with milk; it can be made to a very stiff consistency so that it forms—what could be described as—a softish lumpy crumble (called \"krummel-pap\") or a more creamy porridge consistency (called \"slap-pap\"). It is generally made from maize (\"mielie\") meal and is sold under various brand names. Taystee Wheat is made into a creamy wheat-based porridge. Porridge brands unique to South Africa include Jungle Oats and Bokomo Maltabella (made from malted sorghum). In other parts of Africa it is known as \"ugali\", \"sadza\", and \"banku\" or \"makkau\".\n\nScotland is famous for its consumption of oats. In Northern Ireland, the company White's has been milling oats in Tandragee since 1841. England has incorporated porridge in their culture for centuries. Many of the different types of porridge were made specially for the royal family including a type of porridge called \"pea porridge\". This specific dish was made for King Richard II.\n\nBreakfast cereal companies make gluten-free cereals which are free of any gluten-containing grains. These cereals are targeted for consumers who suffer from gluten-related disorders, as celiac disease, non-celiac gluten sensitivity and wheat allergy, among others. Some companies that produce gluten-free cereals include Kellogg's, General Mills, Nature's Path and Arrowhead Mills.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "82789", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=82789", "title": "Pita", "text": "Pita\n\nPita ( or ), sometimes spelled pitta (mainly UK), is a family of yeast-leavened round flatbreads baked from wheat flour, common in the Mediterranean, Middle East, and neighboring areas. It includes the widely-known version with an interior pocket, also known as Arabic bread, Syrian bread, and other names, as well as pocketless versions such as the Greek pita, used to wrap souvlaki.\n\nPita bread has roots in the prehistoric flatbreads of the Middle East. There is evidence from 14,500 years ago, during the Stone Age, that the Natufian people in what is now Jordan made a kind of flatbread from wild cereal grains. Ancient wheat and barley were among the earliest domesticated crops in the Neolithic period of about 10,000 years ago, in the Fertile Crescent. By 4,000 years ago, bread was of central importance in societies such as the Babylonian culture of Mesopotamia, where the earliest-known written records and recipes of bread-making originate, and where pita-like flatbreads cooked in a \"tinûru\" (\"tannur\" or \"tandoor\") were a basic element of the diet, and much the same as today's tandoor bread or taboon bread. However, there is no record of the steam-puffed, two-layer \"pocket pita\" in the ancient texts, or in any of the medieval Arab cookbooks, and according to food historians such as Charles Perry and Gil Marks it was likely a later development.\n\nThe first mention of the word in English cited in the Oxford English Dictionary was in 1936. The English word is borrowed from Modern Greek πίτα, in turn from the Byzantine Greek πίτα \"bread, cake, pie, pitta\" (attested in 1108) and possibly from the Ancient Greek πίττα or πίσσα \"pitch/resin\" (for the gloss), or Ancient Greek πικτή (\"pikte\"), \"fermented pastry\", which may have passed to Latin as \"picta\" cf. pizza. It was received into Levantine Arabic (as \"fatteh,\" since Arabic lacks the sound /p/). Other hypotheses trace the word back to the Classical Hebrew word \"patt\" פת (literally \"a morsel of bread\"). It is spelled like the Aramaic \"pittəṭā\"/\"pittā\" (פיתה), from which it was received into Byzantine Greek (see above). Hypotheses also exist for Germanic or Illyrian intermediaries.\n\nThe word has been borrowed by Turkish as \"pide\", and appears in the Balkan languages as Serbo-Croatian \"pita\", Romanian \"pită\", Albanian \"pite\", Kosovo Albanian \"pitalka\", Bulgarian \"pitka\" or \"pita\". In Arabic, the phrase خبز البيتا (pita bread) is sometimes used; other names are simply خبز 'khubz, bread' or الخبز العربي 'Arab bread' or خبز الكماج 'al-kimaj bread'. In Egypt, it is called ʿaish (عيش) or ʿaish baladi (عيش بلدي), meaning rustic, local, or rural bread. \"'Aish\" also means life in Arabic, highlighting the importance of pita bread in Egyptian culture. In Greek it is called aravikē pita\" (lit. 'Arabic pastry').\n\n Most pita are baked at high temperatures (), which turns the water in the dough into steam, thus causing the pita to puff up and form a pocket. When removed from the oven, the layers of baked dough remain separated inside the deflated pita, which allows the bread to be opened to form a pocket. However, pita is sometimes baked without pockets and is called \"pocket-less pita\". Regardless of whether it is made at home or in a commercial bakery, pita is proofed for a very short time—only 15 minutes.\nModern commercial pita bread is prepared on advanced automatic lines. These lines have high production capacities, processing 100,000 pound (45,000 kg) silos of flour at a time and producing thousands of loaves per hour. The ovens used in commercial baking are much hotter than traditional clay ovens——so each loaf is only baked for one minute. The pita are then air-cooled for about 20 minutes on conveyor belts before being shipped immediately or else stored in commercial freezers kept at a temperature of .\n\nPita can be used to scoop sauces or dips, such as hummus, or to wrap kebabs, gyros, or falafel in the manner of sandwiches. It can also be cut and baked into crispy pita chips.\n\nIn Turkish cuisine, the word \"pide\" may refer to three different styles of bread: a flatbread similar to that eaten in Greece and Arab countries, a pizza-like dish where the filling is placed on the (often boat-shaped) dough before baking, and Ramazan pide. The first type of \"pide\" is used to wrap various styles of kebab, while the second is topped with cheese, ground meat, or other fresh or cured meats, and/or vegetables. Regional variations in the shape, baking technique, and toppings create distinctive styles for each region.\n\nIn Cyprus, pita is typically rounder, fluffier and baked on a cast iron skillet. It is used for souvlakia, sheftalia, halloumi with lountza, and gyros. In Greece the word \"pita\" means \"pastry\" and is usually used for various cakes and pastries like spanakopita (spinach pie) and karydopita (walnut cake) unrelated to the English language \"pita\" flatbread. such as the round καρβέλι karvéli or the oblong φραντζόλα frantzóla. This style of pita flatbread, in the English language meaning of the word, is almost exclusively used as a wrap for \"pita-souvlaki\" or gyros with usually garnished with some combination of tzatziki sauce, tomatoes, onions, and french fries.\n"}
{"id": "84239", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84239", "title": "Peeps", "text": "Peeps\n\nPeeps are marshmallow candies sold in the United States and Canada that are shaped into chicks, bunnies, and other animals. There are also different shapes used for various holidays. Peeps are used primarily to fill Easter baskets, though recent advertising campaigns market the candy as \"Peeps - Always in Season\", as Peeps has since expanded to include Halloween, Christmas and Valentine's Day; since 2014 it has been available year-round with the introduction of Peeps Minis. They are made from sugar, corn syrup, gelatin, and various food dyes.\n\nPeeps are produced by Just Born, a candy manufacturer founded in Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, by Russian immigrant Sam Born (1891-1959). In 1953 Just Born acquired the Rodda Candy Company and its marshmallow chick line, and replaced the painstaking process of hand-forming the chicks with mass production. When founder Sam Born would display a sign for his freshly made candy, he would title it \"Just Born,\" playing off of his last name and the fact that he made his candy fresh daily. According to Mary Bellis, the newly purchased company, Just Born, was soon the \"largest marshmallow candy manufacturer in the world.\" New shapes other than the chicks were produced following a theme according to the season starting in the 1960s. Twenty years later, the Marshmallow Peeps Bunny was released as a popular year round shape of the candy. The yellow chicks were the original form of the candy — hence their name — but then the company introduced other colors and, eventually, the myriad shapes in which they are now produced. Peeps were manufactured in different colors such as lavender and blue starting in 1995. Prior to that they were only being produced in the traditional colors: pink, white, and yellow. New flavors such as vanilla, strawberry, and chocolate were introduced between the years of 1999 and 2002.\n\nIn 2009, Just Born expanded the Peeps product line further by introducing Peeps Lip Balm in four flavors: grape, strawberry, vanilla, and cotton candy. Just Born has come out with several other various accessories. Items such as nail polish, wrist bands, umbrellas, plush toys, golf gloves, earrings, and necklaces are produced and sold online and in retail stores. Other companies have produced items based on the popular Peeps candy. Peeps micro bead pillows were made by Kaboodle and conform to one's shape. The company Kaboodle promises that \"they'll last a lot longer than their edible counterpart!\" Ranging from infant sizes to adult sizes, Peeps Halloween costumes can also be found on the shelves of several costume stores. The first Peeps & Co. store opened in November 2009 in National Harbor, Maryland, Prince George's County. Peeps & Company retail stores were later opened in Minnesota, and Pennsylvania. In 2014, Peeps Minis were introduced, and were intended to be available year-round.\nAn annual \"Peeps Eating\" contest is held each year at National Harbor in front of the Peeps & Company store. 2017 winner, Matt Stonie of California, ate 255 Peeps in five minutes. The first such event was arranged by Shawn Sparks in 1994, and had only six participants. Dave Smith started an annual Peep Off in Sacramento after contacting a participant in the first Peep Off. Another contest in Maryland asks that participants create a diorama of a culturally important scene from the modern era, featuring a number of Peeps. The winner gets two free inflatable life jackets.\n\nSeveral newspapers hold annual contests in which readers submit photos of dioramas featuring Peeps. The \"St. Paul Pioneer Press\" was the first paper to hold such a contest. Similar contests are put on by The \"Chicago Tribune\", and the \"Seattle Times\". These contests frequently correspond with the Easter holiday. MIT also has a yearly Peeps contest. The Washington Post held an annual contest until 2017, when it was discontinued. The smaller Washington City Paper introduced their contest in it place.\n\nThe Racine Art Museum is sponsoring the International Peeps Competition from April 1–28. Anyone can enter the contest, centered on the theme \"peep-powered work of art\".\n\nThe following are other contests held in various states. Peeps jousting consists of putting two Marshmallow Chicks into the microwave and seeing which one gets the biggest and therefore affects/deforms the other. \"Peepza\" is a dessert pizza made with Peeps. Also, blogs were created according to Fox News entitled \"101 Fun Ways to Torture a Peep.\"\n\nPeeps are sometimes jokingly described as \"indestructible\". In 1999 scientists at Emory University jokingly performed experiments on batches of Peeps to see how easily they could be dissolved, burned or otherwise disintegrated, using such agents as cigarette smoke, boiling water and liquid nitrogen. In addition to discussing whether Peeps migrate or evolve, they claimed that the eyes of the confectionery \"wouldn't dissolve in anything\". One website claims that Peeps are insoluble in acetone, water, diluted sulfuric acid, and sodium hydroxide (the site also claims that the Peeps experimental subjects sign release forms). Concentrated sulfuric acid seems to have effects similar to the expected effects of sulfuric acid on sugar.\n\nThis debate featured in an episode of the sitcom \"Malcolm in the Middle\" (\"Traffic Jam\"), in which Francis, insisting the \"Quacks\" (as they were called) would dissolve in his stomach rather than expand, takes up the dare to eat 100 of them, does so, but gets very sick in the process.\n\nAs marshmallow ages exposed to air — it dehydrates, becoming \"stale\" and slightly crunchy. According to Just Born, 25%-30% of their customers prefer eating Peeps stale.\n\nBarry Church, a football player for the Dallas Cowboys, was unable to attend training camp due to an unexpected root canal. PEEPS offered Church a season's supply of their product—in that marshmallows are a lot softer on the teeth than the Jolly Ranchers which caused Church's requirement of a root canal.\n\nSeveral recipes and creative ideas to alter Peeps have been invented. Fox News Magazine published an article in 2013 including several recipes from various creators, including Peeps smores, Peeps pancakes, home-made chocolate covered Peeps, Peeps marshmallow chocolate chip cookies, Peeps brownies, Peeps popcorn, Peeps frosting, Peeps Krispie treats, and Peeps syrup.\n\nPeeps can also be used as a marshmallow topper for hot chocolate. \n\nA recipe for \"Peepshi\" involves placing a peep onto a Rice Krispie treat and wrapping it in Fruit by the Foot, to create a single \"Peepshi roll\" in the style of a sushi roll.\n\nIn April 2017, several internet and Twitter postings, and TV news stories claimed 'outrage' that Peeps were being used as a pizza topping.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "84241", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84241", "title": "Marshmallow", "text": "Marshmallow\n\nA marshmallow is a sugar confectionery that in its modern form typically consists of sugar, water and gelatin whipped to a squishy consistency, molded into small cylindrical pieces, and coated with corn starch. Some marshmallow recipes call for eggs. This is the modern version of a medicinal confection made from \"Althaea officinalis\", the marshmallow plant.\n\nThe word \"marshmallow\" comes from the mallow plant species (\"Althaea officinalis\"), a herb native to parts of Europe, North Africa, and Asia which grows in marshes and other damp areas. The plant's stem and leaves are fleshy and its white flower has five petals. It is not known exactly when marshmallows were invented, but their history goes back as early as 2000 BC. Ancient Egyptians were said to be the first to make them and eating them was a privilege strictly reserved for gods and for royalty, who used the root of the plant to soothe coughs and sore throats, and to heal wounds. The first marshmallows were prepared by boiling pieces of root pulp with honey until thick. Once thickened, the mixture was strained, cooled, and then used as intended.\n\nWhether used for candy or medicine, the manufacture of marshmallows was limited to a small scale. In the early to mid-1800s, the marshmallow had made its way to France where confectioners augmented the plant's traditional medicinal value with indulgent ingredients utilized by the Egyptians. Owners of small candy stores would whip the sap from the mallow root into a fluffy candy mold. This candy was called Pâte de Guimauve. It was a spongy-soft dessert made from whipping dried marshmallow roots with sugar, water, and egg whites. It was sold in bar form as a lozenge. Drying and preparing of the marshmallow took one to two days before the final product could be produced. In the late 1800s, candy makers started looking for a new process, and discovered the starch mogul system, in which trays of modified corn starch had a mold firmly pushed down in them to create cavities within the starch. The cavities were then filled with the whipped marshmallow sap mixture, and allowed to cool or harden. At the same time, candy makers began to replace the mallow root with gelatin which created a stable form of marshmallow.\n\nBy the early 1900s, thanks to the starch mogul system, marshmallows were introduced to the United States and available for mass consumption. They were sold in tins as penny candy, and were soon used in a variety of food recipes like banana fluff, lime mallow sponge, and tutti frutti. In 1948, Alex Doumak patented the extrusion process which involved running marshmallow ingredients through tubes. The tubes created a long rope of marshmallow mixture, and were then set out to cool. The ingredients are then cut into equal pieces, and packaged.\n\nModern marshmallow manufacturing is highly automated, and has been since the early 1950s when the extrusion process was first developed. Numerous improvements and advancements allow for production of thousands of pounds of marshmallow a day. Today, the marshmallow typically consists of four components. These are sugar, water, air, and a whipping agent (usually a protein). The type of sugar and whipping agent varies depending on desired characteristics. Each ingredient plays a specific role in the final product.\n\nConfectioners in early 19th century France pioneered the innovation of whipping up the marshmallow sap and sweetening it, to make a confection similar to modern marshmallow. The confection was made locally by the owners of small sweet shops. They would extract the sap from the mallow plant's root, and whip it themselves. The candy was very popular, but its manufacture was labour-intensive. In the late 19th century, French manufacturers thought of using egg whites or gelatin, combined with modified corn starch, to create the chewy base. This avoided the labour-intensive extraction process, but it did require industrial methods to combine the gelatin and corn starch in the right way.\n\nAnother milestone in the development of the marshmallow was the extrusion process by the Greek American confectioner Alex Doumak in 1954. In this process, marshmallow mixture is pumped through extrusion heads with numerous ports aligned next to each other which form continuous \"ropes\" of marshmallow. This invention allowed marshmallows to be manufactured in a fully automated way, and gives us the familiar cylindrical shape of today's marshmallow. To make marshmallows in large quantities, industrial confectioners mix water, sugar, and corn syrup in massive kettles which are then heated to a precise temperature and cooked for a precise time. This mixture is then pumped to another kettle to cool. Re-hydrated gelatin is added and blended in, once the mixture has cooled enough to not denature the gelatin. To give the marshmallow its fluffiness, it is pumped through a blender while air is pumped into it. At this point, it still needs to be cooled further, so it will hold its shape when extruded, it is pumped through a heat exchanger prior to being pumped through the extrusion heads and onto a wide conveyor belt. The conveyor belt is coated in corn starch and more corn starch is dusted onto the top of the marshmallow extrusion as it passes down the conveyor. A large knife the width of the conveyor is located at the end of this conveyor table that chops the extrusion into the size marshmallow desired. The pieces will then be tumbled in corn starch in a large drum, allowing the marshmallow to form its familiar skin and to allow pieces that did not get cut all the way to break apart.\n\nMarshmallows, like most candies, are sweetened with sucrose. They are prepared by the aeration of mixtures of sucrose and proteins to a final density of about 0.5 g/ml. The molecular structure of marshmallows is simply a sugar solution blended with stabilizing structure agents such as gelatin, xanthan gum, or egg whites. The aforementioned structural components prevents the air from escaping and collapsing the marshmallows during aeration.\n\nMarshmallows consist of four ingredients: sugar, water, air, and a whipping agent/aerator (usually a protein). The type of sugar and whipping agent varies depending on desired characteristics. Each brand of marshmallow has its own specific formula for how to produce the 'perfect' marshmallow. No matter how they are made each ingredient plays a specific role in the final product.\n\nThe marshmallow is a foam, consisting of an aqueous continuous phase and a gaseous dispersed phase (in other words, a liquid with gas bubbles spread throughout). In addition to being a foam, this also makes marshmallows an \"aerated\" confection because it is made up of 50% air. The goal of an aerated confection like marshmallow is to incorporate gas into a sugar mixture, and stabilize the aerated product before the gas can escape. When the gas is introduced into the system, tiny air bubbles are created. This is what contributes to the unique textural properties, and mouth-feel of this product.\n\nIn marshmallows, proteins are the main surface-active agents responsible for the formation, and stabilization of the dispersed air. Due to their structure, surface-active molecules gather at the surface area of a portion of (water-based) liquid. A portion of each protein molecule is hydrophilic, with a polar charge, and another portion is hydrophobic and non-polar. The non-polar section has little or no affinity for water, and so this section orients as far away from the water as possible. However, the polar section is attracted to the water and has little or no affinity for the air. Therefore, the molecule orients with the polar section in the water, with the non-polar section in the air. Two primary proteins that are commonly used as aerators in marshmallows are albumen (egg whites) and gelatin.\n\nAlbumen is a mixture of proteins found in egg whites, and is utilized for its capacity to create foams. In a commercialized setting, dried albumen is used as opposed to fresh egg whites. In addition to convenience, the advantages of using dried albumen are an increase in food safety, and the reduction of water content in the marshmallow. Fresh egg whites carry a higher risk of \"Salmonella,\" and are approximately 90 percent water. This is undesirable for the shelf life and firmness of the product. For artisan-type marshmallows, prepared by a candy maker, fresh egg whites are usually used. Albumen is rarely used on its own when incorporated into modern marshmallows, and instead is used in conjunction with gelatin.\n\nGelatin is the aerator most often used in the production of marshmallows. It is made up of collagen, a structural protein derived from animal skin, connective tissue, and bones. Not only can it stabilize foams, like albumen, but when combined with water it forms a thermally-reversible gel. This means that gelatin can melt, then reset due to its sensitivity to temperature. The melting point of gelatin gel is around , which is just below normal body temperature (around ). This is what contributes to the \"melt-in-your-mouth\" sensation when a marshmallow is consumed—it actually starts to melt when it touches the tongue.\n\nDuring preparation, the temperature needs to be just above the melting point of the gelatin, so that as soon as it is formed it cools quickly, and the gelatin will set, retaining the desired shape. If the marshmallow rope mixture exiting the extruder during processing is too warm, the marshmallow starts to flow before the gelatin sets. Instead of a round marshmallow, it will take a more oval form. Excessive heat can also degrade, or break down, the gelatin itself. Therefore, when marshmallows are being produced at home or by artisan candy makers, the gelatin is added after the syrup has been heated and cooled down.\n\nIn commercial operations, the gelatin is simply cooked with the sugar syrup, rather than being added later after the syrup has cooled. In this case, kinetics play an important role, with both time and temperature factoring in. If the gelatin was added at the beginning of a batch that was then cooked to 112–116 °C in 20–30 minutes, a significant amount of gelatin would break down. The marshmallow would have reduced springiness from that loss of gelatin. But since the time the syrup spends at elevated temperature in modern cookers is so short, there is little to no degradation of the gelatin.\n\nIn terms of texture, and mouth-feel, gelatin makes marshmallows chewy by forming a tangled 3-D network of polymer chains. Once gelatin is dissolved in warm water (dubbed the \"blooming stage\"), it forms a dispersion, which results in a cross-linking of its helix-shaped chains. The linkages in the gelatin protein network, trap air in the marshmallow mixture, and immobilize the water molecules in the network. The result is the well-known spongy structure of marshmallows. This is why the omission of gelatin from a marshmallow recipe will result in marshmallow crème, since there is no gelatin network to trap the water and air bubbles.\n\nMarshmallows are an amorphous solid because of how the sugars crystallize. This is because the crystals formed are not grained, and very fine in size, as opposed to its crystalline counterpart where the crystals are grainy, and larger in size. This is why temperature plays such an important role in the production of marshmallows. To make an amorphous solid like marshmallow, the sugar syrup solution (sucrose, corn syrup, and invert sugar) is heated at a high temperature. It is then cooled so rapidly that no crystals have time to form. The quick cooling of the liquid in open air does not allow the sucrose molecules to form crystals, so glass (amorphous) crystals are created instead. In most confections, a combination of different sugars is used, each of which influence the solubility concentration of one another. The presence of invert sugar and/or corn syrup causes a substantial decrease in sucrose solubility due to the competition among the sugar molecules for water.\n\nA traditional marshmallow might contain about 60% corn syrup, 30% sugar, and 1% to 2% gelatin. The corn syrup/sugar ratio will provide only about 35% to 40% solids to prevent crystallization. Crystallization can be further avoided with proper selection of the corn syrup type. A higher conversion corn syrup will contribute more invert sugar to the formula, which inhibits crystallization. If a grainy-textured marshmallow is desired, you simply increase the sugar ratio to the point where it will crystallize about 60% to 65%, then whip it, and add a little powdered sugar. As it cools, the sugar crystallizes out to form the grained marshmallow.\n\nSucrose is another ingredient utilized in most aerated confections. It is a disaccharide that consists of one glucose and fructose molecule. This sugar provides sweetness and bulk to the marshmallow, while simultaneously setting the foam to a firm consistency as it cools. Sucrose, and sugars in general, impair the ability of a foam to form, but improve foam stability. Therefore, sucrose is used in conjunction with a protein like gelatin. The protein can adsorb, unfold, and form a stable network, while the sugar can increase the viscosity. Liquid drainage of the continuous phase must be minimized as well. Thick liquids drain more slowly than thin ones, and so increasing the viscosity of the continuous phase will reduce drainage. A high viscosity is essential if a stable foam is to be produced. Therefore, sucrose is a main component of marshmallow. But sucrose is seldom used on its own, because of its tendency to crystallize.\n\nCorn syrup, sometimes known as glucose syrup, is a syrup containing dextrin, maltose, and dextrose. Partial hydrolysis of cornstarch obtains it. Corn syrup is important in the production of marshmallow because it prevents the crystallization of other sugars (like sucrose). It may also contribute body, reduce sweetness, and alter flavor release, depending on the Dextrose Equivalent (DE) of the glucose syrup used.\n\nThe DE is the measure of the amount of reducing sugars present in a sugar product in relation to glucose. Lower-DE glucose syrups will provide a chewier texture, while higher-DE syrups will make the product more tender. In addition, depending on the type of DE used, can alter the sweetness, hygroscopicity, and browning of the marshmallow. Corn syrup is flavorless and cheap to produce which is why candy companies love using this product.\n\nInvert sugar is produced when sucrose breaks down due to the addition of water, also known as hydrolysis. This molecule exhibits all the characteristics of honey except the flavor because it is the primary sugar found in honey. This means that invert sugar has the ability to prevent crystallization, and produce a tender marshmallow. It is also an effective humectant, which allows it to trap water, and prevent the marshmallow from drying out. For some candies, this is not a good trait to have, but for marshmallows, it is an advantage since it has a high moisture content.\n\nUnless a variation of the standard marshmallow is being made, vanilla is always used as the flavoring. The vanilla can either be added in extract form, or by infusing the vanilla beans in the sugar syrup during cooking. This is the best technique to get an even distribution of flavor throughout the marshmallow.\n\nAcids, such as cream of tartar or lemon juice, may also be used to increase foam stability. Addition of acid decreases the pH. This reduces the charge on the protein molecules, and brings them closer to their isoelectric point. This results in a stronger, more stable inter-facial film. When added to egg whites, acid prevents excessive aggregation at the interface. However, acid delays foam formation. It may therefore be added toward the end of the whipping process after a stable foam has been created.\n\nIn commercial marshmallow manufacture, the entire process is streamlined and fully automated.\n\nTo begin the gelatin is simply cooked with the sugar and syrup. After the gelatin-containing syrup is cooked, it is allowed to cool a bit before air is incorporated into the system. Whipping is generally accomplished in a rotor-stator type device. Compressed air is injected into the warm syrup, held at a temperature just above the melting point of gelatin. In a marshmallow aerator, pins on a rotating cylinder (rotor) intermesh with stationary pins on the wall (stator) to provide the shear forces necessary to break the large injected air bubbles into numerous tiny bubbles that provide the smooth, fine-grained texture of marshmallow. A continuous stream of light and fluffy marshmallow exits the aerator on its way to the forming step.\n\nThe marshmallow candy is typically formed in one of three ways. First, it can be extruded in the desired shape and cut into pieces, as done for Jet-Puffed marshmallows. Second, it can be deposited onto a belt, as done for Peeps. Finally, it can be deposited into a starch-based mold in a mogul to make various shapes.\n\nThe process for making marshmallow at home differs from manufacturing-plant processes. At home, a mixture of corn syrup and sugar is boiled to about to give a moisture content of 20% or so. In a separate step, gelatin is hydrated with enough warm water to make a thick solution. Once the sugar syrup has cooled to about , the gelatin solution is blended in along with any desired flavoring, and whipped in a Kitchen Aid or Hobart-type mixer to reach the final density. The marshmallow is then scooped out of the bowl, slabbed on a table, and cut into pieces for serving.\n\nA popular camping or backyard tradition in the United Kingdom, North America, New Zealand and Australia is the roasting or toasting of marshmallows over a campfire or other open flame. A marshmallow is placed on the end of a stick or skewer and held carefully over the fire. This creates a caramelized outer skin with a liquid, molten layer underneath. Major flavor compounds and color polymers associated with sugar browning are created during the caramelization process.\n\nS'mores are a traditional campfire treat in the United States, made by placing a toasted marshmallow on a slab of chocolate, which is placed between two graham crackers. These can then be squeezed together to cause the chocolate to start to melt.\n\nMarshmallows are defined in US law as a food of minimal nutritional value.\n\nThe traditional marshmallow recipe uses powdered marshmallow root, but most commercially manufactured marshmallows instead use gelatin in their manufacture. Vegans and vegetarians avoid gelatin, but there are versions which use a substitute non-animal gelling agent such as agar. In addition, marshmallows are generally not considered to be kosher or halal unless either their gelatin is derived from kosher or halal animals or they are vegan.\n\nMarshmallow creme and other less firm marshmallow products generally contain little or no gelatin, which mainly serves to allow the familiar marshmallow confection to retain its shape. They generally use egg whites instead. Non-gelatin, egg-containing versions of this product may be consumed by ovo vegetarians. Several brands of vegetarian and vegan marshmallows and marshmallow fluff exist.\n"}
{"id": "84332", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84332", "title": "Oxytone", "text": "Oxytone\n\nAn oxytone (; from the , \"\", 'sharp-sounding') is a word with the stress on the last syllable, such as the English words \"correct\" and \"reward\". A paroxytone is stressed on the penultimate (second last) syllable. A proparoxytone is stressed on the antepenultimate (third last) syllable.\n\n"}
{"id": "84487", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84487", "title": "Cognac", "text": "Cognac\n\nCognac ( or ; ) is a variety of brandy named after the town of Cognac, France. It is produced in the surrounding wine-growing region in the departments of Charente and Charente-Maritime.\n\nCognac production falls under French appellation d'origine contrôlée designation, with production methods and naming required to meet certain legal requirements. Among the specified grapes, Ugni blanc, known locally as Saint-Emilion, is most widely used. The brandy must be twice distilled in copper pot stills and aged at least two years in French oak barrels from Limousin or Tronçais. Cognac matures in the same way as whiskies and wines barrel age, and most cognacs spend considerably longer \"on the wood\" than the minimum legal requirement.\n\nCognac is a type of brandy, and after the distillation and during the aging process, is also called \"eau de vie\". It is produced by twice distilling white wines produced in any of the designated growing regions.\n\nThe white wine used in making cognac is very dry, acidic, and thin. Though it has been characterized as \"virtually undrinkable\", it is excellent for distillation and aging. It may be made only from a strict list of grape varieties. For it to be considered a true \"cru\", the wine must be at least 90% Ugni blanc (known in Italy as Trebbiano), Folle blanche and Colombard, while up to 10% of the grapes used can be Folignan, Jurançon blanc, Meslier St-François (also called Blanc Ramé), Sélect, Montils, or Sémillon. Cognacs which are not to carry the name of a \"cru\" are freer in the allowed grape varieties, needing at least 90% Colombard, Folle blanche, Jurançon blanc, Meslier Saint-François, Montils, Sémillon, or Ugni blanc, and up to 10% Folignan or Sélect.\n\nAfter the grapes are pressed, the juice is left to ferment for 2-3 weeks, with the region's native, wild yeasts converting the sugar into alcohol; neither sugar nor sulfur may be added. At this point, the resulting wine is about 7 to 8% alcohol.\n\nDistillation takes place in traditionally shaped Charentais copper alembic stills, the design and dimensions of which are also legally controlled. Two distillations must be carried out; the resulting \"eau de vie\" is a colourless spirit of about 70% alcohol.\n\nOnce distillation is complete, it must be aged in Limousin oak casks for at least two years before it can be sold to the public. It is typically put into casks at an alcohol by volume strength around 70%. As the cognac interacts with the oak barrel and the air, it evaporates at the rate of about 3% each year, slowly losing both alcohol and water. This phenomenon is called locally \"la part des anges\", or \"the angels' share\". Because the alcohol dissipates faster than the water, the alcohol concentration drops to about 40% over time. The cognac is then transferred to large glass carboys called \"bonbonnes\", then stored for future blending. Since oak barrels stop contributing to flavor after four or five decades, longer aging periods may not be beneficial.\n\nThe age of the cognac is calculated as that of the youngest component used in the blend. The blend is usually of different ages and (in the case of the larger and more commercial producers) from different local areas. This blending, or \"marriage\", of different \"eaux de vie\" is important to obtain a complexity of flavours absent from an \"eau de vie\" from a single distillery or vineyard. Each cognac house has a master taster (\"maître de chai\"), who is responsible for blending the spirits, so that cognac produced by a company will have a consistent house style and quality. In this respect, it is similar to the process of blending whisky or non-vintage Champagne to achieve a consistent brand flavor. A very small number of producers, such as Guillon Painturaud and Moyet, do not blend their final product from different ages of \"eaux de vie\", so produce a \"purer\" flavour (a practice roughly equivalent to the production of single-malt Scotch whisky).\nHundreds of vineyards in the Cognac AOC region sell their own cognac. These are likewise blended from the \"eaux de vie\" of different years, but they are single-vineyard cognacs, varying slightly from year to year and according to the taste of the producer, hence lacking some of the predictability of the better-known commercial products. Depending on their success in marketing, small producers may sell a larger or smaller proportion of their product to individual buyers, wine dealers, bars and restaurants, the remainder being acquired by larger cognac houses for blending. The success of artisanal cognacs has encouraged some larger industrial-scale producers to produce single-vineyard cognacs.\n\nAccording to the Bureau National Interprofessionnel du Cognac (BNIC), the official quality grades of cognac are:\n\n\nThe names of the grades are in English because the historical cognac trade, particularly in the 18th century, significantly involved the British.\n\nCognac is also classified by \"crus\", tightly defined geographic denominations where the grapes are grown. Their distinctive soils and microclimates produce \"eaux de vie\" with characteristics particular to their specific location.\n\n\nThe cognac-producing regions called Champagne should not be confused with the northeastern region of Champagne, a wine region that produces sparkling wine by that name, although they do share a common etymology.\n\nClose to 200 cognac producers exist. According to one 2008 estimate a large percentage of cognac—more than 90% for the US market—comes from only four producers: Courvoisier (owned by Beam Suntory), Hennessy (LVMH), Martell (Pernod Ricard), and Rémy Martin (Rémy Cointreau). Other brands meeting the AOC criteria for cognac include: Bache-Gabrielsen/Dupuy, Braastad, Camus, La Fontaine de La Pouyade, Château Fontpinot, Delamain, Pierre Ferrand, Frapin, Gautier, Hine, Marcel Ragnaud, Moyet, Otard, Meukow, and Cognac Croizet.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "84582", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=84582", "title": "Bopis", "text": "Bopis\n\nBopis (\"bópiz\" in Spanish) is a piquant Filipino dish of pork or beef lungs and heart sautéed in tomatoes, chilies and onions.\n\nThis spicy Filipino dish has Spanish origins, but the meaning in its original language and even region of origin are lost. \n\nIt is sauteed and stir-fried (until crispy) with finely-chopped pig innards and cooked in onion, tomato, garlic, and pepper.\n\nRecipes for bopis may differ from region to region and family to family, with regard to ingredients, spices and flavoring. \n\nClassified as \"pulutan\" in Filipino cuisine, \"bopis\" is served with alcoholic beverages or may be taken as a viand with steamed rice.\n"}
{"id": "85272", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=85272", "title": "Hapax legomenon", "text": "Hapax legomenon\n\nIn corpus linguistics, a hapax legomenon ( also or ; pl. \"hapax legomena\"; sometimes abbreviated to \"hapax\") is a word that occurs only once within a context, either in the written record of an entire language, in the works of an author, or in a single text. The term is sometimes incorrectly used to describe a word that occurs in just one of an author's works, but more than once in that particular work. \"Hapax legomenon\" is a transliteration of Greek , meaning \"(something) being said (only) once\".\n\nThe related terms dis legomenon, tris legomenon, and tetrakis legomenon respectively (, , ) refer to double, triple, or quadruple occurrences, but are far less commonly used.\n\n\"Hapax legomena\" are quite common, as predicted by Zipf's law, which states that the frequency of any word in a corpus is inversely proportional to its rank in the frequency table. For large corpora, about 40% to 60% of the words are \"hapax legomena\", and another 10% to 15% are \"dis legomena\". Thus, in the Brown Corpus of American English, about half of the 50,000 distinct words are \"hapax legomena\" within that corpus.\n\n\"Hapax legomenon\" refers to a word's appearance in a body of text, not to either its origin or its prevalence in speech. It thus differs from a nonce word, which may never be recorded, may find currency and may be widely recorded, or may appear several times in the work which coins it, and so on.\n\n\"Hapax legomena\" in ancient texts are usually difficult to decipher, since it is easier to infer meaning from multiple contexts than from just one. For example, many of the remaining undeciphered Mayan glyphs are \"hapax legomena\", and Biblical (particularly Hebrew; see § Hebrew examples) \"hapax legomena\" sometimes pose problems in translation. \"Hapax legomena\" also pose challenges in natural language processing.\n\nSome scholars consider \"Hapax legomena\" useful in determining the authorship of written works. P. N. Harrison, in \"The Problem of the Pastoral Epistles\" (1921) made \"hapax legomena\" popular among Bible scholars, when he argued that there are considerably more of them in the three Pastoral Epistles than in other Pauline Epistles. He argued that the number of \"hapax legomena\" in a putative author's corpus indicates his or her vocabulary and is characteristic of the author as an individual.\n\nHarrison's theory has faded in significance due to a number of problems raised by other scholars. For example, in 1896, W. P. Workman found the following numbers of \"hapax legomena\" in each Pauline Epistle: Rom. 113, I Cor. 110, II Cor. 99, Gal. 34, Eph. 43 Phil. 41, Col. 38, I Thess. 23, II Thess. 11, Philem. 5, I Tim. 82, II Tim. 53, Titus 33. At first glance, the last three totals (for the Pastoral Epistles) are not out of line with the others. To take account of the varying length of the epistles, Workman also calculated the average number of \"hapax legomena\" per page of the Greek text, which ranged from 3.6 to 13, as summarized in the diagram on the right. Although the Pastoral Epistles have more \"hapax legomena\" per page, Workman found the differences to be moderate in comparison to the variation among other Epistles. This was reinforced when Workman looked at several plays by Shakespeare, which showed similar variations (from 3.4 to 10.4 per page of Irving's one-volume edition), as summarized in the second diagram on the right.\n\nApart from author identity, there are several other factors that can explain the number of \"hapax legomena\" in a work:\n\nIn the particular case of the Pastoral Epistles, all of these variables are quite different from those in the rest of the Pauline corpus, and \"hapax legomena\" are no longer widely accepted as strong indicators of authorship (although the authorship of the Pastorals is subject to debate on other grounds).\n\nThere are also subjective questions over whether two forms amount to \"the same word\": dog vs. dogs, clue vs. clueless, sign vs. signature; many other gray cases also arise. The \"Jewish Encyclopedia\" points out that, although there are 1,500 \"hapaxes\" in the Hebrew Bible, only about 400 are not obviously related to other attested word forms.\n\nIt would not be especially difficult for a forger to construct a work with any percentage of \"hapax legomena\" desired. However, it seems unlikely that forgers much before the 20th century would have conceived such a ploy, much less thought it worth the effort.\n\nA final difficulty with the use of \"hapax legomena\" for authorship determination is that there is considerable variation among works known to be by a single author, and disparate authors often show similar values. In other words, \"hapax legomena\" are not a reliable indicator. Authorship studies now usually use a wide range of measures to look for patterns rather than rely upon single measurements.\n\nIn the fields of computational linguistics and natural language processing (NLP), esp. corpus linguistics and machine-learned NLP, it is common to disregard \"hapax legomena\" (and sometimes other infrequent words), as they are likely to have little value for computational techniques. This disregard has the added benefit of significantly reducing the memory use of an application, since, by Zipf's law, many words are hapax legomena.\n\nThe following are some examples of \"hapax legomena\" in languages or corpora.\n\n\nClassical Chinese and Japanese literature contains many Chinese characters that feature only once in the corpus, and their meaning and pronunciation has often been lost. Known in Japanese as , literally \"lonely characters\", these can be considered a type of \"hapax legomenon\". For example, the \"Classic of Poetry\" (c. 1000 BC) uses the character 篪 exactly once in the verse \"伯氏吹埙，仲氏吹篪\", and it was only through the discovery of a description by Guo Pu (276-324 AD) that the character could be associated with a specific type of ancient flute.\n\n\n\n\nThere are about 1,500 Hapax legomena in the Hebrew Bible; however, due to Hebrew roots, suffixes and prefixes, only 400 are \"true\" hapax legomena. A full list can be seen at the Jewish Encyclopedia entry for \"Hapax Legomena.\"\n\nSome examples include:\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "85320", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=85320", "title": "Gravy", "text": "Gravy\n\nGravy is a sauce often made from the juices of meats that run naturally during cooking and thickened with wheat flour or corn starch for added texture. In the United States and Singapore, the term can refer to a wider variety of sauces. The gravy may be further colored and flavored with gravy salt (a simple mix of salt and caramel food coloring) or gravy browning (gravy salt dissolved in water) or ready-made cubes and powders can be used as a substitute for natural meat or vegetable extracts. Canned and instant gravies are also available. Gravy is commonly served with roasts, meatloaf, rice, and mashed potatoes.\n\n\nIn United Kingdom and Ireland, a Sunday roast is usually served with gravy. It is commonly eaten with pork, chicken, lamb, or beef. It is also popular in different parts of England, Scotland, Wales and Ireland to have gravy with just chips (mostly from a fish and chip shop).\n\nIn United Kingdom and Irish cuisine, as well as in the cuisines of Commonwealth countries like Australia, New Zealand, and some areas in Canada, the word gravy refers only to the meat based sauce derived from meat juices, stock cubes or gravy granules. Use of the word \"gravy\" does not include other thickened sauces. One of the most popular forms is onion gravy, which is eaten with sausages, Yorkshire pudding and roast meat.\n\nThroughout the United States, gravy is commonly eaten with Thanksgiving foods such as turkey, mashed potatoes and stuffing. One Southern United States variation is sausage gravy eaten with American biscuits. Another Southern US dish that has white gravy is chicken fried steak. Rice and gravy is a staple of Cajun and Creole cuisine in the southern US state of Louisiana.\n\nGravy is an integral part of the Canadian dish poutine. It uses a mix of beef and chicken stock as well as vinegar.\n\nIn many parts of Asia, particularly India, Malaysia, and Singapore, gravy is any thickened liquid part of a dish. For example, the liquid part of a thick curry may be referred to as gravy.\n\nIn the Mediterranean, Maghreb cuisine is dominated with gravy and bread-based dishes. Tajine and most Maghreb (Morocco, Algeria and Tunisia) dishes are derivatives of oil, meat and vegetable gravies. The dish is usually served with a loaf of bread. The bread is then dipped into the gravy and then used to gather or scoop the meat and vegetables between the index, middle finger and thumb, and consumed.\n\nIn gastronomy of Menorca, it has been used since the English influence during the 17th century in typical Menorcan and Catalan dishes, as for example \"macarrons amb grevi\" (pasta).\n\nIn Italian-American communities, particularly on the East Coast and around the Chicago area, the term \"gravy\", \"tomato gravy\", or \"Sunday gravy\" is used, but this refers to a tomato sauce rather than meat drippings mixed with a thickener. Used in this context, \"gravy\" is meant to be an English translation from the Italian \"sugo\", which means sauce, as in \"sugo per pastasciutta\". Whether certain sauces are referred to as \"gravy\" or \"sauce\" in Italian-American cuisine continues to be a source of debate and varies according to different family and community traditions.\n\n"}
{"id": "87476", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=87476", "title": "Head cheese", "text": "Head cheese\n\nHead cheese or brawn is a cold cut that originated in Europe. A version pickled with vinegar is known as souse. Head cheese is not a dairy cheese, but a terrine or meat jelly often made with flesh from the head of a calf or pig, or less commonly a sheep or cow, and often set in aspic. The parts of the head used vary, but the brain, eyes, and ears are usually removed. The tongue, and sometimes the feet and heart, may be included. It can also be made from trimmings from pork and veal, adding gelatin to the stock as a binder. Sometimes it is made with nothing from the head.\n\nHead cheese may be flavored with onion, black pepper, allspice, bay leaf, salt, and vinegar. It is usually eaten cold or at room temperature.\n\nHistorically, meat jellies were made of the cleaned (all organs removed) head of the animal, which was simmered to produce stock, a peasant food made since the Middle Ages. When cooled, the stock congeals because of the natural gelatin found in the skull. The aspic may need additional gelatin, or more often, reduction, to set properly.\n\nThe term 'head cheese' is used in North America, 'potted heid' in Scotland, 'brawn' elsewhere in Britain and Australia. The term 'souse' for the pickled variety is North American and West Indian.\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\nIn Australia, it is known as \"brawn\" or \"Presswurst\". It is usually seen as something of an old-fashioned dish, although various large firms, such as D'Orsogna, Don Smallgoods and KR Castlemaine produce it.\n\nSouse is pickled meat and trimmings usually made from pig's feet, chicken feet or cow's tongue, to name a few. The cooked meat or trimmings are cut into bite-sized pieces and soaked in a brine made of water, lime juice, cucumbers, hot pepper, salt and specially prepared seasonings. It is usually eaten on Saturday mornings, especially in St. Vincent and Barbados. In Trinidad and Tobago, it is served or sold at most social gatherings, such as parties, all-inclusive fetes and sporting competitions. \n\nHead cheese is very popular and is usually referred to as \"queso de cabeza\" in Chile and Colombia. In Peru, Ecuador, Bolivia, and Costa Rica, it is also known as \"queso de chancho\". It is known as \"queso de Cerdo\" in Uruguay and Argentina. In Panama, it is known as \"sao\" (from Caribbean English souse), made with pig's feet and prepared the same way as in the Caribbean; it is a dish from the Caribbean coast, where most of Panama's West Indian community lives.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "87542", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=87542", "title": "BLT", "text": "BLT\n\nA BLT is a type of sandwich, named for the initials of its primary ingredients, bacon, lettuce and tomato. It can be made with varying recipes according to personal preference. Simple variants include using different types of lettuce, toasting or not, or adding mayonnaise. More pronounced variants can include using turkey bacon or tofu in place of bacon, or removing the lettuce entirely.\n\nThe combination of ingredients on a sandwich dates back to the early 1900s, though it didn't achieve widespread popularity until after World War II, when the ingredients became more readily available year-round. Referencing the sandwich by its initials rather than naming the ingredients in full did not become common until the 1970s. The BLT has been ranked as the second most popular sandwich in the US and as the UK's favourite sandwich, and is frequently referenced or depicted in media and culture.\n\nAlthough the ingredients of the BLT have existed for many years, there is little evidence of BLT sandwich recipes prior to 1900. The \"1903 Good Housekeeping Everyday Cook Book\", a recipe by a Dr. Kevin Zinter for a club sandwich included bacon, lettuce, tomato, mayonnaise and a slice of turkey sandwiched between two slices of bread. While the 1929 book \"Seven Hundred Sandwiches\" does include a section on bacon sandwiches, the recipes often include pickles and none contain tomato.\n\nThe BLT became popular after World War II because of the rapid expansion of supermarkets, which allowed ingredients to be available year-round. The initials, representing \"bacon, lettuce, tomato\", likely began in the American restaurant industry as shorthand for the sandwich, but it is unclear when this transferred to the public consciousness. For example, a 1951 edition of the \"Saturday Evening Post\" makes reference to the sandwich, although it does not use its initials, describing a scene in which: \"On the tray, invariably, are a bowl of soup, a toasted sandwich of bacon, lettuce and tomato, and a chocolate milk shake.\"\n\nA 1954 issue of \"Modern Hospital\" contains a meal suggestion that includes: \"Bean Soup, Toasted Bacon Lettuce and Tomato Sandwich, Pickles, Jellied Banana Salad, Cream Dressing, and Pound Cake.\" By 1958, Hellmann's Mayonnaise advertised their product as \"traditional on bacon, lettuce, and tomato sandwiches,\" suggesting that the combination had been around for some time. However, there are several references to a \"B.L.T\" in the early 1970s, including in one review of Bruce Jay Friedman's play entitled \"Steambath\" titled: \"A B.L.T. for God – hold the mayo.\". The abbreviation used in title references a line of dialogue in the play in which God yells, \"Send up a bacon and lettuce and tomato sandwich, hold the mayo. You burn the toast, I'll smite you down with my terrible swift sword.\" The coexistence of the shortened version and the full name suggests this was a period of transition as the abbreviation was popularized.\n\nAccording to food historian John Mariani, it is the second most popular sandwich in the U.S., after the ham sandwich, and a poll by OnePoll in 2008 showed that it was the \"nation's favourite\" sandwich in the UK. BLT sandwiches are popular especially in the summer, following the tomato harvest. In the United States, the BLT-season is associated with an increase in the price of pork-bellies, which are processed into bacon.\n\nWhile there are variations on the BLT, the essential ingredients are bacon, tomatoes and lettuce between two slices of bread, often toasted. The quantity and quality of the ingredients are matters of personal preference. The bacon can be well cooked or tender, but as it \"carries\" the other flavors, chefs recommend using higher quality meat; in particular, chef Edward Lee states \"Your general supermarket bacon is not going to cut the mustard.\"\n\nIceberg lettuce is a common choice because it does not add too much flavour while adding crunch. Food writer Ed Levine has suggested that BLT does not require lettuce at all, as it is \"superfluous\", a suggestion that Jon Bonné, lifestyle editor at MSNBC, described as \"shocking\". Michele Anna Jordan, author of \"The BLT Cookbook\", believes the tomato is the key ingredient and recommends the use of the beefsteak tomato as it has more flesh and fewer seeds.\n\nThe sandwich is sometimes served with dressings, like mayonnaise. The bread can be of any variety, white or wholemeal, toasted or not, depending on personal preference.\n\nThe sandwich has a high sodium and fat content, and has been specifically targeted by UK café chains in an effort to reduce salt and fat. Due to this, low-fat mayonnaise is a common substitute along with low salt bread and less fatty bacon. In 2009, seven large cafe chains in the UK made a commitment to reducing salt and fat through similar substitutions. A more visible solution is to use turkey bacon in lieu of normal bacon. One of the variations on the BLT is the club sandwich, a two-layered sandwich in which one layer is a BLT. The other layer can be almost any sort of sliced meat, normally chicken or turkey.\n\nThe BLT has been deconstructed into a number of forms; for example, Edna Lewis and Scott Peacock created a BLT salad in \"The Gift of Southern Cooking\" by cutting the ingredients into pieces and tossing in mayonnaise. This variation was described by \"New York Times\" writer Julia Reed as \"even more perfect than a BLT\".\n\nVegans and vegetarians may replace bacon with tempeh or tofu as meat analogue instead. Alternatively they can use mock bacon.\nIn 1963, pop art sculptor Claes Oldenburg created \"Giant BLT\", a soft sculpture representing the sandwich, now in the collection of the Whitney Museum of American Art. It measures and uses vinyl, kapok and wood, painted in acrylic. Every time it is moved, it must be restacked, which means it varies between exhibits. The artist has said that he has not set it up personally since its creation in 1963.\n\nIn 2003, a record for the world's largest BLT was created by Michele Anna Jordan, measuring in length. It was prepared at a 2003 tomato festival in Sonoma County, California and had a total area of . In 2008, Marie Ganister and Glenda Castelli created a BLT – a sandwich which was originally planned with Jordan. The record was broken again by the Iron Barley restaurant in St. Louis, Missouri, with a BLT measuring , and is currently held by Bentley Dining Services for their 2009 attempt, measuring .\n\nIn 2004, the \"New Statesman\" reported that the sandwich chosen by a politician as his \"favourite\" is loaded with political symbolism. For example, it suggested that a chicken tikka sandwich would be a \"gentle nod to an imperial past and a firm statement of a multicultural present and future\". The article went on to explain that the then Leader of the Opposition William Hague had accused the then Prime Minister Tony Blair of being a hypocrite with regards to food, telling one portion of society that his favourite meal was fish and chips and another that it was a fresh fettuccine dish. The conclusion of the article was that Blair chose the BLT as his favourite sandwich, which appeals to all classes.\n"}
{"id": "87784", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=87784", "title": "Pico de gallo", "text": "Pico de gallo\n\nIn Mexican cuisine, pico de gallo (, ), also called salsa fresca or salsa cruda, is made from chopped tomato, onion, cilantro, serrano peppers (jalapeños or habaneros are used as alternatives), salt, and lime juice. Other ingredients, such as shrimp, or avocado, are also sometimes added.\n\n\"Pico de gallo\" can be used in much the same way as other Mexican liquid salsas, but since it contains less liquid, it can also be used as a main ingredient in dishes such as tacos and fajitas.\n\nThe tomato-based variety is widely known as salsa picada (minced/chopped sauce). In Mexico it is normally called salsa mexicana (Mexican sauce). Because the colours of the red tomato, white onion, green chili and cilantro are reminiscent of the colours of the Mexican flag, it is also sometimes called salsa bandera (flag sauce).\n\nIn many regions of Mexico the term refers to any of a variety of salads (including fruit salads), salsa, or fillings made with tomato, tomatillo, avocado, orange, jícama, cucumber, papaya, or mild chilis. The ingredients are tossed in lime juice and either hot sauce or chamoy, then sprinkled with a salty chili powder.\n\nAccording to food writer Sharon Tyler Herbst, \"pico de gallo\" (\"rooster's beak\") is named thus because originally people ate it by pinching pieces between the thumb and forefinger.\n\nIn their book \"Authentic Mexican: Regional Cooking from the Heart of Mexico\", Rick Bayless and Deann Groen speculate that the name might allude to the bird feed-like texture and appearance of the mince.\n\nMany native residents of the Sonoran Mexico region explain that the salsa is thus named because the serrano pepper resembles a rooster's beak in shape.\n\n"}
{"id": "87791", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=87791", "title": "Corn tortilla", "text": "Corn tortilla\n\nIn North America and Central America, a corn tortilla or just tortilla (, ) is a type of thin, unleavened flatbread, made from powdered hominy (nixtamalized maize (corn)). In Guatemala and Mexico, there are three colors of maize dough for making tortillas: white maize, yellow maize and blue maize (or black maize).\n\nA similar bread from South America, called \"arepa\" (though \"arepas\" are typically much thicker than tortillas), predates the arrival of Europeans to America, and was called \"tortilla\" by the Spanish from its resemblance to the traditional Spanish round, unleavened cakes and omelettes (originally made without potatoes, which are native to South America). The Aztecs and other Nahuatl-speakers call tortillas tlaxcalli (); these have become the prototypical tortillas.\n\nMaize kernels naturally occur in many colors, depending on the cultivar: from pale white, to yellow, to red and bluish purple. Likewise, corn meal and the tortillas made from it may be similarly colored. White and yellow tortillas are by far the most common, however.\n\n\"Tortilla\", from Spanish \"torta\", cake, plus the diminutive \"-illa\", literally means \"little cake\". Nahuatl \"tlaxcalli\" is derived from the verb \"(i)xca\" \"to bake\" with the help of the prefix \"tla\"- and two common suffixes -\"l\"- and -\"li\" (<-\"tli\"), that is \"something baked\".\n\nThe corn tortilla, with many variants, has been a staple food in North American and Mesoamerican cultures since pre-Columbian times. It predates the alternative wheat flour version of the tortilla (\"tortilla de harina\" or \"tortilla de trigo\") in all such cultures, as wheat was not grown in the Americas prior to European contact.\n\nIn Aztec times, two or three corn tortillas would be eaten with each meal, either plain or dipped in mole or a chili pepper and water sauce. Tortillas were also sold at Aztec marketplaces filled with turkey meat, turkey eggs, beans, honey, squash, prickly pears and chili pepper.\n\nAnalogous staple foods in New World cultures, made from hominy and serving a similar nutritional function, include the \"sope\", the \"totopo\", the \"gordita\", and the \"tlacoyo\" of Mexico, the \"pupusa\" of Central America, and the \"arepa\" of northern South America.\n\nThe \"tamal\" (or tamale) of Mexico, Central America and northern South America is also made from \"nixtamal\" (Aztec word for hominy), but is much thicker and is a dish unto itself, usually including other ingredients and flavors, rather than a staple food used in other dishes.\n\nMaize has been a staple food for centuries. It is the most planted crop in the Mexican region. The country grows more than 42 different types of maize, each of which has several varieties whose number is estimated at more than 3,000 by the International Center for the Improvement of Maize and Wheat (CIMMYT). The characteristics of each variety depend upon soil conditions, humidity, altitude, and how cultivated. Some of the earliest evidence of maize cultivation suggests that domestication took place in several places at the same time.\n\nMaize is the basis of most Mexican cuisine, with some exception in the culinary traditions of northern Mexico, where wheat is taking the place of maize as the cereal base. In Mexico, the primary use of maize is the tortilla, but it is also a principle ingredient in other foods including tamales and atole. The maize used for tortillas can be ripe and dry, but it is also consumed fresh and mature (maize), or soft and fresh (\"xilote\").\n\nTortillas are consumed daily. Factory-made tortillas are widely sold, and they can easily be home-made. Tortilla production starts from early morning because lunch is the main meal of the day for most people. In Mexico, lunch is eaten between 1:30 p.m. and 3:30 p.m. Some supermarkets and grocery stores sell tortillas throughout the day.\n\nTortillas come in several different flavors and colors according to the kind of maize used. Tortillas come with all the traditional foods of Mexico, though not with all the fillings that are used these days.\n\nMexican and, more generally, Latin American dishes made with maize tortillas include:\n\n\nA tortilla is made by curing maize in limewater in the nixtamalization process, which causes the skin of the corn kernels to peel off (the waste material is typically fed to poultry), then grinding and cooking it, kneading it into a dough called \"masa nixtamalera\", pressing it flat into thin patties using a rolling pin or a tortilla press, and cooking it on a very hot \"comal\" (originally a flat terra cotta griddle, now usually made of light sheet-metal instead). The process, called nixtamalization, was developed indigenously by pre-Columbian cultures and predates European contact by many centuries, if not millennia. Soaking the maize in limewater is important because it makes available the B vitamin niacin and the amino acid tryptophan. When maize was brought to Europe, Africa and Asia from the New World, this crucial step was often omitted. Those whose diet consisted mostly of corn meal often became sick — because of the lack of niacin and tryptophan — with the deficiency disease pellagra, which was common in Spain, Northern Italy, and the southern United States.\n\nIn Mexico, particularly in the towns and cities, corn tortillas are often made nowadays by machine and are very thin and uniform, but in many places in the country, they are still made by hand, even when the \"nixtamal\" is ground into masa by machine. In Belize, El Salvador, Guatemala, or Honduras, they are still often made by hand and are thicker. Corn tortillas are customarily served and eaten warm; when cool, they often become rubbery or grainy as the cooked starches stale. The largest tortilla producer in the world is the Mexican company Gruma, headquartered in Monterrey.\n\nTraditionally throughout Mesoamerica from pre-Columbian times into the mid-20th century, the \"masa\" was prepared by women using a \"mano\" (a cylinder-shaped stone like a rolling pin) and \"metate\" (a stone base with a slightly concave top for holding the corn). This method is still used in some places in Mexico.\n\nThe wheat flour tortilla was an innovation after wheat was brought to the New World from Spain while this region was the colony of New Spain. It is made with an unleavened, water-based dough, pressed and cooked like corn tortillas. These tortillas are very similar to the unleavened bread popular in Arab, eastern Mediterranean and southern Asian countries, though thinner and smaller in diameter. In China the \"laobing\" (烙餅), a thick circular \"pancake\", is similar to the tortilla. The Indian \"roti\", which is made essentially from wheat flour, is another example.\n\nTortillas vary in size from about 6 to over 30 cm (2.4 to over 12 in), depending on the region of the country and the dish for which it is intended. Among tortilla variants (without being, strictly speaking, tortillas) there are \"pupusas\", \"pishtones\", \"gorditas\", \"sopes\", and \"tlacoyos\". They are smaller, thicker versions to which beans, \"chicharrón\", \"nopales\" or other ingredients have been added. They are customarily cooked on a greased pan.\n\nIn Nicaragua, a type of tortillas called \"güirilas\" are also consumed. They are made from young white corn. \"Güirilas\" are thick, sweet and filling. They are eaten alone, with crumbled cheese, or accompanying a dish. In Argentina, Bolivia and southern Chile, the size of the tortillas is smaller. They are generally saltier, made from wheat or corn flour, and roasted in the ashes of a traditional adobe oven. This kind of tortilla is called \"sopaipilla\" (not to be confused with a puffy frybread of the same name common in the United States). In Chile and Argentina, it may also be sweetened after being cooked by boiling in sugar water.\n\nIn commercial production and even in some larger restaurants, automatic machines make tortillas from dough. A tortilla seller is, in or .\n\nAn uncooked corn tortilla is 46% water, 45% carbohydrates, 3% fat, and 6% protein (table). In a 100 gram reference amount, a raw corn tortilla supplies 218 calories and is a rich source (20% or higher of the Daily Value, DV) of phosphorus (45% DV) and magnesium (20% DV). It is a moderate source (10-19% DV) of vitamin B6, niacin, manganese, and zinc (table).\n\nCorn tortillas are the basis of many traditional Mexican dishes, such as tacos, tostadas, enchiladas, flautas, quesadillas, \"chilaquiles\", and tortilla soup (sopa de tortilla). Warmed corn tortillas are also often served as an accompaniment to stews, soups, grilled meats and other dishes, as bread might be served in other cuisines. By contrast, wheat flour tortillas are often used for burritos and quesadillas, particularly in the United States. Corn tortillas may also be deep fried to make crisp tortilla chips. These are often salted, and can be eaten alone or accompanied with various salsas and dips such as guacamole. Tortilla chips are a key ingredient in nachos.\n"}
{"id": "88056", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=88056", "title": "Oden", "text": "Oden\n\nOden was originally what is now commonly called \"misodengaku\" or simply \"dengaku\"; konjac (\"konnyaku\") or tofu was boiled and eaten with miso. Later, instead of using miso, ingredients were cooked in dashi, and oden became popular. Ingredients vary according to region and between each household. Karashi is often used as a condiment.\n\nOden is often sold from food carts, though some izakayas also serve it, and dedicated oden restaurants exist. Many different varieties are sold, with single-ingredient dishes sometimes as cheap as 100 yen. While it is usually considered a winter food, some carts and restaurants offer oden year-round. Many of these restaurants keep their broth as a master stock, replenishing it as it simmers to let the flavor deepen and develop over many months and years.\n\nIn Nagoya, it may be called and soy sauce is used as a dipping sauce.\nMiso oden is simmered in Hatchomiso broth, which tastes lightly sweet. Konjac and tofu are common ingredients.\n\nIn the Kansai area, this dish is sometimes called and tends to be more strongly flavored than the lighter Kantō version.\n\nOden in Shizuoka uses a dark colored broth flavored with beef stock and dark soy sauce, and all ingredients are skewered. Dried and ground fish (sardine, mackerel, or katsuobushi) and aonori powder (edible seaweed) are sprinkled on top before eating.\n\nUdon restaurants in Kagawa Prefecture in Shikoku almost always offer oden as a side dish, to be eaten with sweet miso while waiting for udon.\n\nIn China, 7-11 markets oden as \"haodun\" () a word play on \"good pot.\"\n\nIn South Korea, the loanword \"odeng\" () borrowed from Japanese \"oden\" () is a synonym of \"eomuk\" (fishcakes). The boiled dish consist of fishcakes are called by the names such as \"odeng-tang\" () or \"eomuk-jeongol\" (), with the words such as \"tang\" (soup) or \"jeongol\" (hot pot) attached to the ingredient name.\n\nThe street food version is sold from small carts and is usually served with a spicy soup. It is very common on the streets of South Korea and there are many restaurants that have it on the menu or specialize in it.\n\nThe dish was introduced to Taiwanese cuisine during Japanese rule and is referred to in Taiwanese Hokkien as \"olen\" (), which has been further loaned into Taiwanese Mandarin as \"hēilún\" (). \"Tianbula\" () is a similar dish commonly sold at night markets. Despite using the same name as the Japanese tempura, Taiwanese tempura is more a variant of oden. Besides the more traditional ingredients, the Taiwanese \"olen\" also uses many local ingredients, such as pork meatballs and blood puddings. More recently, oden is offered in convenience stores where it is sold as \"guāndōngzhǔ\" (, from Kansai \"kanto-daki\").\n\n\n"}
{"id": "88417", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=88417", "title": "Tostada (tortilla)", "text": "Tostada (tortilla)\n\nTostada ( or ; ) is a Spanish word meaning \"toasted\". In Mexico and other parts of Latin America, it is the name of various local dishes which are toasted or use a toasted ingredient as the main base of their preparation.\n\nTostada usually refers to a flat or bowl-shaped (like a bread bowl) tortilla that is deep fried or toasted. It may also refer to any dish using a \"tostada\" as a base. It can be consumed alone, or used a base for other foods. Corn tortillas are usually used for tostadas, although tostadas made of wheat flour may occasionally be found.\n\nThe tostada avoids waste when tortillas are not fresh enough to be made into tacos, but fresh enough to be eaten, just like stale bread can be eaten as toast. The tortilla is fried in boiling oil until it becomes golden, rigid and crunchy, rather like a slice of toasted bread. Commercial tostadas—similar in taste and consistency to tortilla chips—are also widely available nowadays.\n\nA tostada is served as a companion to various Mexican food, mostly seafood and stews, such as menudo, birria, and pozole. The latter is usually accompanied with tostadas dipped in sour cream. Tostadas can be found anywhere in Mexico, but Oaxaca has the largest, the tlayuda; it is the size of a pizza and is sometimes topped with fried chapulines (a variety of grasshoppers).\n\nTostadas are a dish on their own in Mexico and the American Southwest. Mostly, the toppings used are the same as with tacos: beans, cheese, sour cream, chopped lettuce, sliced onions, and salsa are mainstays that may be spread on a tostada, which is then topped with diced and fried meat, usually chicken or pork (such as the \"tostada de pata\", made with chopped pork fingers in conserve), but also beef. They are also popular with seafood such as tuna, shrimp, crab, chopped octopus, and ceviche. Vegetarian tostadas, while not as common, can also be found. Due to the fragile nature of a tostada, the main topping (usually beans or cream) must be pasty enough to stay on; this keeps the other toppings or garnishes from falling off while being eaten.\n\nTostadas can also be an appetizer (\"botana\"), cut into small triangles to make tortilla chips to dip into salsa, guacamole, beans, cream, cream cheese or served with chile con queso. This version of the tostada has its origins both in the \"totopos de maiz\" and the New Mexican and Tex-Mex cuisine. Commercial tortilla chips—sometimes known as \"nachos\"—are also commonly sold in stores and supermarkets.\n\nIn Central America, tostadas are often prepared with black beans, parsley, ground beef and curtido.\n\n"}
{"id": "88429", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=88429", "title": "Chilaquiles", "text": "Chilaquiles\n\nChilaquiles () from the Nahuatl word \"chīlāquilitl\" is a traditional Mexican dish. \n\nTypically, corn tortillas cut in quarters and lightly fried are the basis of the dish. Green or red salsa or mole is poured over the crisp tortilla triangles. The mixture is simmered until the tortilla starts softening. Pulled chicken is sometimes added to the mix. It is commonly garnished with crema, crumbled \"queso fresco\", raw onion rings and avocado slices.\nChilaquiles can be served with refried beans, eggs (scrambled or fried), beef and guacamole as side dish. \n\nAs with many Mexican dishes, regional and family variations are quite common.\nUsually, chilaquiles are eaten at breakfast or brunch. This makes them a popular recipe to use leftover tortillas and salsas. \n\nChilaquiles are frequently confused with Tex-Mex migas, as each is a dish that uses tortilla chips/strips served primarily in the morning.\n\nIn central Mexico it is common for the tortilla chips to remain crisp. To achieve this, all ingredients except the salsa are placed on a plate and the salsa is poured at the last moment, seconds before serving. In Guadalajara, \"cazuelas\" are kept simmering filled with chilaquiles that become thick in texture similar to \"polenta\".\nIn the state of Sinaloa, chilaquiles are sometimes prepared with a white sauce. In the state of Tamaulipas, on the north-east side of the country, red tomato sauce is commonly used.\n\nRecipes for chilaquiles have been found in a U.S. cookbook published in 1898. The book was Encarnación Pinedo's \"El cocinero español\" (\"The Spanish Cook\"). She included three recipes—one for \"chilaquiles tapatios a la mexicana\", one for \"chilaquiles a la mexicana\", and one for \"chilaquiles con camarones secos\" (chilaquiles with dry shrimp).\n\n"}
{"id": "88811", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=88811", "title": "Braunschweiger (sausage)", "text": "Braunschweiger (sausage)\n\nBraunschweiger (named after Braunschweig, Germany) is the name for several types of sausages in different regions. In the German language, \"Braunschweiger\" is the demonym for people from Brunswick (German name, Braunschweig), but under German food law refers to a variety of mettwurst. In Austria, Braunschweiger is known as a type of parboiled sausage (\"Brühwurst\"), while American Braunschweiger is often confused with liverwurst.\n\n\"Braunschweiger Mettwurst\" is a smoked, soft and spreadable sausage usually made from raw minced pork and spiced with garlic, salt and pepper. Produced by Brunswick butchers as a regional speciality since the early 19th century, it became widespread with the advent of food preservation by canning. Several different recipes exist, some also including beef and fat.\n\nIn Austria, Braunschweiger is a Brühwurst variant which is similar to Jagdwurst (\"hunting sausage\"), made with a mixture of pork and beef, bacon and nitrite curing salt. This type of sausage is usually eaten between meals.\n\nIn the United States and Canada, Braunschweiger refers to a type of pork liver sausage which, if stuffed in natural casings, is nearly always smoked. Commercial products often contain smoked bacon, and are stuffed into fibrous casings. Liverwurst (another type of pork liver sausage) however is never smoked nor does it contain bacon.\n\nThe USDA requires that the product contain a minimum of 30% liver. A typical commercial formula is about 40% pork liver or scalded beef liver, 30% scalded pork jowl, 20% lean pork trimmings and 10% bacon ends and pieces. Added seasonings include salt and often include white pepper, onion powder or chopped onion, and mace. Curing ingredients (sodium erythorbate and sodium nitrite) are optional.\n\nBraunschweiger has a very high amount of vitamin A, iron, protein and fat. The meat has a very soft, spread-like texture and a distinctive spicy liver-based flavor, very similar to the Nordic \"leverpostej\". It is usually used as a spread for toast, but can also be used as a filling for sandwiches, often paired with stone-ground mustard, sliced tomato, onion and cheese. In the Midwestern United States, braunschweiger is typically enjoyed in a sandwich with various condiments such as ketchup, mustard, and dill pickles, or simply spread on crackers. There are also a few recipes for pâté and cheese balls which use braunschweiger as a primary ingredient. However, pâté is creamier than braunschweiger.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "89822", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=89822", "title": "Pez", "text": "Pez\n\nPez (stylised as PEZ) is the brand name of an Austrian candy and associated mechanical candy dispensers. The candy is a pressed, dry, straight-edged, curved-corner block 15 mm ( inch) long, 8 mm ( inch) wide, and 5 mm ( inch) high, with Pez dispensers holding 12 candy pieces.\n\nPez was invented in Austria and later exported worldwide. The all-uppercase spelling of the logo echoes the trademark's style on the packaging and the dispensers, with the logo drawn in perspective and giving the appearance that the letters are built out of 44 brick-like Pez mints (14 bricks in the \"P\" and 15 in each of the \"E\" and \"Z\").\n\nDespite the widespread recognition and popularity of the Pez dispenser, the company considers itself to be primarily a candy company, and over 3 billion bricks are consumed each year in the U.S. alone. Pez dispensers are part of popular culture in many nations, an example being 'Soul Candy' in Japanese manga series \"Bleach\". Because of the large number of dispenser designs over the years, they are collected by enthusiasts.\n\nPez was first marketed as a compressed peppermint sweet in Vienna, Austria, in 1927 by Eduard Haas III. The name PEZ is an abbreviation of PfeffErminZ (German for peppermint). Haas created the peppermints using family owned baking powders, and decided to serve the mints in small, hand-size containers. He manufactured a small tin to hold the mints, similar to the modern Altoids tins. The first Pez mint dispensers, known as \"regulars,\" were similar in shape to a cigarette lighter, and dispensed an adult breath mint marketed as an alternative to tobacco. They were invented by Oscar Uxa. Haas Food Manufacturing Corporation of Vienna was the first to sell Pez products.\n\nWorld War II slowed marketing and production. In 1945, manufacturers devised and promoted the Pez Box Regular. In 1952 Eduard Haas introduced his product to the United States, and Curtis Allina headed Pez's U.S. business. In 1955, the Pez company placed heads on the dispensers and marketed them for children. Santa Claus and Mickey Mouse were among the first character dispensers. Since 1950, over 1500 Pez dispensers, including the original character dispensers, have been created.\n\nPez vending machines were used in Germany, Switzerland, and Austria. The first German machines were introduced around 1954 and were produced by DWM (Deutsche Waggon- und Maschinenfabrik) and GWS (Georg Wiegandt und Söhne), both of Berlin, Germany. Machines were later introduced in Switzerland and then in Austria, in October 1956; these were produced by Glerios / R.Seipel & Co. and Theodor Braun (Vienna).\n\nIn 1973, Pez built a factory in Orange, Connecticut, U.S. In 1983, Scott McWhinnie became the president of the Pez company. He retired in 2003. Joe Vittoria became president of the company in 2004. Around 2005 the size of the original factory was doubled and the Pez dispenser line was expanded. In the mid-1990s peppermints were reintroduced with remakes of the 'regulars'.\n\nIn early 2006 the family of the original founder of the company bought back 32.5% of the stock from investment company PGH for €18M. They now own 67.5% of the company. The headquarters are in Traun, Austria. The Pez mints are produced in Traun and Orange, Connecticut, U.S. while the dispensers are produced in Hungary and China.\n\nPez, Inc. has applied for and received patents related to the Pez dispensers, and usually molds the patent number onto the stem of the design. The patent number cannot be reliably used to determine how old the dispenser is. Collectors refer to the first two digits of a patent number as a shorthand for a given patent number. For example, the 5.9 (5,984,285) patent was granted in 1999, but didn't first appear on a Pez item until 2002. By 2007, 4.9 patented items were still regularly appearing on store shelves. Dispensers can also be found with several non-US patents, such as the German \"DBP 818.829\" (Deutsches Bundes Patent), and the Mexican \"Patent Nr 141,242\".\n\nPez dispenser stems will usually also be embossed with several injection mold codes (IMCs). Some, like those found on the bottom of the dispenser feet, will tell which mold position the specific piece came from. One found on the side of the stem indicates the country of origin.\nThe IMC code 4 is followed by a superscripted second number which identifies the specific facility in Austria.\n\nEarly Pez dispensers did not have character heads on them. They were what is known now as \"regulars\". A regular dispenser is just a rectangular box with a contoured flip top for dispensing the candy. Toy character head dispensers were introduced in 1955, after the candy was introduced in the United States. There are over 550 unique dispenser heads with thousands of variations.\n\nIn the 1970s, three historical figures were created: Betsy Ross, Daniel Boone, and Paul Revere, which were released as part of the Bicentennial series. These dispenser heads were not made to actually look like the people they represented, but instead used generic faces with different accessories.\n\nStar Wars Pez dispensers have been amongst the most popular collectibles since they were introduced in the 1990s.\n\nThe company initially had a general rule against creating likenesses of real people, but in 2006 a limited-edition series of three Pez dispensers were made with likenesses of members of the Teutul family from Orange County Choppers.\n\nThe NASCAR-themed dispensers are based on the helmets of famous drivers, rather than their actual resemblance.\n\nIn 2007, a limited edition Elvis set was released featuring three dispensers from different periods in Presley's life.\n\nIn 2008, the first \"Star Trek\" dispensers were released in a gift set with the seven original series crew and the \"Starship Enterprise\". A second \"Star Trek\" gift set, based on \"The Next Generation\" series, was released in Fall 2012.\n\nIn 2009, in honor of the 70th anniversary of \"The Wizard of Oz\", Pez released a boxed set with dispensers in the likenesses of the Cowardly Lion, the Tin Man, the Scarecrow, Dorothy Gale, Toto, Glinda, the Wizard of Oz, and the Wicked Witch of the West. Only 300,000 sets were made.\n\nIn 2010, Pez released a Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs set, featuring a story book. These are the first characters featured on the \"Short Stem\" body. Only 250,000 sets were made.\n\nIn 2011, a two-piece limited edition set was released for charity, featuring Prince William, Duke of Cambridge and his wife-to-be, Catherine, Duchess of Cambridge.\n\nIn 2011, an eight-piece limited edition set was released featuring characters from The Lord of the Rings as they appear in Peter Jackson's \"The Lord of the Rings\" films: Bilbo, Frodo, Sam, Gandalf, Aragorn, Legolas, Gimli, and Gollum. Only 250,000 sets were made. 150,000 Walmart-exclusive sets were made. The Walmart sets did not have Bilbo. Instead, they came with the Eye of Sauron.\n\nIn October 2012, Pez released a limited edition KISS gift set. The Starchild, The Demon, The Catman, and The Spaceman are displayed in a reusable metal gift tin.\n\nIn 2013, Pez released the Monsters University pez. The characters were Mike Wazowski, James P. \"Sulley\" Sullivan, Scott \"Squishy\" Squibbles and Randall Boggs.\n\nIn September 2013, Pez released the Hobbit gift set. Bilbo Baggins, Gandalf the Grey, Thorin Oakenshield, Fimbul the Hunter, Radagast, Kili, Bofur, and Dwalin are displayed in a printed cardboard box.\n\nIn 2013, Pez released a series of 18 wheeler trucks. There were companies like Walgreens, Nice, Wawa, Safeway, Randall's, up market, Havoline, and many more.\n\nIn 2014, Pez released a giant Raphael from Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles.\n\nIn 2014, Pez released an Angry Birds gift tin. It had Red, Bomb, Stella, and a Minion Pig in a reusable metal gift tin.\n\nSome Pez dispensers can sell for large amounts as collectibles. The highest verifiable sale of a Pez dispenser was a private sale of a Mickey Mouse softhead at $7,000 between an Austrian dealer and a US collector. This dispenser was never available for sale to the public, and was a factory prototype. The high prices which some Pez items fetch has led to the manufacturing of fake Pez items as well. The 2006 eBay sale of a clear 50s Space Gun for $11,000 took place, but according to Pez researcher David Welch, the dispenser was later proven by chemical testing to be a well-made fake. The most valuable Pez dispensers are three Political Donkeys, each valued at over $13,000, one of which was owned by JFK.\n\nThe Pez collecting hobby has grown to the point where several conventions are held annually around the world. The oldest convention is Pez-a-Mania, which has been held in Ohio since 1991. Conventions are also annually held in Austria, Finland, France, Sweden, and in the U.S. in Missouri, California, Minnesota, Connecticut, Michigan and South Carolina. Pez conventions are a place where collectors and dealers can meet to buy and sell Pez merchandise. There are also typically auctions for charity and games and contests with Pez items as prizes.\n\nEnvision Media Arts are developing an animated film version of Pez with Cameron Fay writing a screenplay, Lee Nelson & David Buelow producing and Gregg Rossen, Brian Sawyer & Jonathan Hung executive producing the film.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "90267", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=90267", "title": "Noodle", "text": "Noodle\n\nNoodles are unleavened dough which is stretched, extruded, or rolled flat and cut into one or a variety of shapes which usually include long, thin strips, or waves, helices, tubes, strings, or shells, or folded over, or cut into other shapes. Noodles are usually cooked in boiling water, sometimes with cooking oil or salt added. They are often pan-fried or deep-fried. Noodles can be served with an accompanying sauce or in a soup. Noodles can be refrigerated for short-term storage or dried and stored for future use. The material composition or geocultural origin must be specified when discussing noodles. Noodles are a staple food in many cultures. \n\nThe word derives from the late 18th century German word \"Nudel\".\n\nThe origin of noodles is Chinese, and the earliest written record of noodles is found in a book dated to the Eastern Han period (25–220). Noodles were often made from wheat dough. It became a staple food for the people of the Han dynasty (206 BCE – 220 CE).\n\nA \"Nature\" article claimed the oldest evidence of noodle consumption was from 4,000 years ago in China. In 2005, a team of archaeologists reported finding an earthenware bowl that contained 4000-year-old noodles at the Lajia archaeological site. These noodle were said to resemble lamian, which are a type of Chinese noodle that is made by repeatedly pulling and stretching the dough by hand. Analyzing the husk phytoliths and starch grains present in the sediment associated with the noodles, it was determined that the noodles were made from millet, identified as belonging to \"Panicum miliaceum\" and \"Setaria italica\" specifically. However, looking at the production process of making noodles from millet, other researchers determined that it is not feasible to stretch millet dough into noodles, concluding that the analyzed husk phytoliths and starch grains did not originate from the noodles that were found. They also criticized the sampling method (as the samples found in the sediment may not represent the composition of the noodles), the morphological observations of the starch granule samples (as it is contradictory to the preparation of noodles in traditional Chinese cooking), and the exclusion of wheat and barley as components (as morphological changes during the cooking process causes difficulty in observation, and the cultivation of wheat and barley has a long history in the Yellow River basin). It has also been noted that millet dough cannot be hand-pulled into noodles, as the absence of gluten in millet causes the dough to be not elastic and thus not malleable.\n\nWheat noodles in Japan (\"udon\") were adapted from a Chinese recipe by a Buddhist monk as early as the 9th century. \"Reshteh\" noodles were eaten by the people of Persia by the 13th century. Innovations continued, as for example, noodles made from buckwheat (\"naengmyeon\") were developed in the Joseon Dynasty of Korea (1392–1897). Ramen noodles, based on Chinese noodles, became popular in Japan by 1900.\n\nIn the 1st century BCE, Horace wrote of fried sheets of dough called \"lagana\". However, the method of cooking these sheets of dough, lagana, does not correspond to the current definition of either a fresh or dry pasta product, which only had similar basic ingredients and perhaps the shape. In the 2nd century CE, the Greek physician Galen mentioned \"itrion\", referring to all homogenous mixtures from flour and water. The Latinized \"itrium\" was used as a reference to a kind of boiled dough. The Jerusalem Talmud records that itrium was common in Israel from the 3rd to 5th centuries CE. Arabs adapted noodles for long journeys in the fifth century, the first written record of dry pasta. The ninth-century Arab physician Isho bar Ali defines \"itriyya\", the Arabic cognate of the Greek word, as string-like shapes made of semolina and dried before cooking. Muhammad al-Idrisi wrote in 1154 that \"itriyya\" was manufactured and exported from Norman Sicily. \"Itriya\" was also known by the Aramaic speakers under the Persian sphere and during the Islamic rule referred to a small soup noodle prepared by twisting bits of kneaded dough into shape.\n\nThe first concrete information on pasta products in Italy dates to the 13th or 14th centuries. Pasta has taken on a variety of shapes, often based on regional specializations. Since at least the 20th century, pasta has become a staple in North America and elsewhere.\n\nIn the area that would become Germany, written mention of \"Spätzle\" has been found in documents dating from 1725, although medieval illustrations are believed to place this noodle at an even earlier date.\n\n\"Zacierki\" is a type of noodle found in Polish cuisine. It was part of the rations distributed in the Łódź Ghetto in German-occupied Poland. (Out of the \"major ghettos\", Łódź was the most affected by hunger, starvation and malnutrition-related deaths.) The diary of a young girl from Łódź recounts a fight she had with her father over a spoonful of \"zacierki\" taken from the family's meager supply of 200 grams.\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "90796", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=90796", "title": "Pie", "text": "Pie\n\nA pie is a baked dish which is usually made of a pastry dough casing that covers or completely contains a filling of various sweet or savoury ingredients.\n\nPies are defined by their crusts. A \"filled\" pie (also \"single-crust\" or \"bottom-crust\"), has pastry lining the baking dish, and the filling is placed on top of the pastry but left open. A \"top-crust\" pie has the filling in the bottom of the dish and is covered with a pastry or other covering before baking. A \"two-crust\" pie has the filling completely enclosed in the pastry shell. Shortcrust pastry is a typical kind of pastry used for pie crusts, but many things can be used, including baking powder biscuits, mashed potatoes, and crumbs.\n\nPies can be a variety of sizes, ranging from bite-size to ones designed for multiple servings.\n\nThe need for nutritious, easy-to-store, easy-to-carry, and long-lasting foods on long journeys, in particular at sea, was initially solved by taking live food along with a butcher or cook. However, this took up additional space on what were either horse-powered treks or small ships, reducing the time of travel before additional food was required. This resulted in early armies adopting the style of hunter-foraging.\n\nThe introduction of the baking of processed cereals including the creation of flour, provided a more reliable source of food. Egyptian sailors carried a flat brittle bread loaf of millet bread called \"dhourra\" cake, while the Romans had a biscuit called \"buccellum\".\n\nDuring the Egyptian Neolithic period or New Stone Age period, the use of stone tools shaped by polishing or grinding, the domestication of plants and animals, the establishment of permanent villages, and the practice of crafts such as pottery and weaving became common. Early pies were in the form of flat, round or freeform crusty cakes called galettes consisting of a crust of ground oats, wheat, rye, or barley containing honey inside. These galettes developed into a form of early sweet pastry or desserts, evidence of which can be found on the tomb walls of the Pharaoh Ramesses II, who ruled from 1304 to 1237 BC, located in the Valley of the Kings. Sometime before 2000 BC, a recipe for chicken pie was written on a tablet in Sumer.\n\nAncient Greeks are believed to have originated pie pastry. In the plays of Aristophanes (5th century BC), there are mentions of sweetmeats including small pastries filled with fruit. Nothing is known of the actual pastry used, but the Greeks certainly recognized the trade of pastry-cook as distinct from that of baker. (When fat is added to a flour-water paste it becomes a pastry.) The Romans made a plain pastry of flour, oil, and water to cover meats and fowls which were baked, thus keeping in the juices. (The covering was not meant to be eaten; it filled the role of what was later called puff paste.) A richer pastry, intended to be eaten, was used to make small pasties containing eggs or little birds which were among the minor items served at banquets.\n\nThe 1st-century Roman cookbook \"Apicius\" makes various mentions of recipes which involve a pie case. By 160 BC, Roman statesman Marcus Porcius Cato (234–149 BC), who wrote \"De Agri Cultura\", notes the recipe for the most popular pie/cake called \"placenta\". Also called \"libum\" by the Romans, it was more like a modern-day cheesecake on a pastry base, often used as an offering to the gods. With the development of the Roman Empire and its efficient road transport, pie cooking spread throughout Europe.\n\nPies remained as a staple of traveling and working peoples in the colder northern European countries, with regional variations based on both the locally grown and available meats, as well as the locally farmed cereal crop. The Cornish pasty is an adaptation of the pie to a working man's daily food needs.\n\nMedieval cooks had restricted access to ovens due to their costs of construction and need for abundant supplies of fuel. Pies could be easily cooked over an open fire, while partnering with a baker allowed them to cook the filling inside their own locally defined casing. The earliest pie-like recipes refer to coffyns (the word actually used for a basket or box), with straight sealed sides and a top; open-top pies were referred to as traps. The resulting hardened pastry was not necessarily eaten, its function being to contain the filling for cooking, and to store it, though whether servants may have eaten it once their masters had eaten the filling is impossible to prove. This may also be the reason why early recipes focus on the filling over the surrounding case, with the partnership development leading to the use of reusable earthenware pie cases which reduced the use of expensive flour.\n\nThe first reference to \"pyes\" as food items appeared in England (in a Latin context) as early as the 12th century, but no unequivocal reference to the item with which the article is concerned is attested until the 14th century (\"Oxford English Dictionary\" sb \"pie\").\n\nSong birds at the time were a delicacy and protected by Royal Law. At the coronation of eight-year-old English King Henry VI (1422–1461) in 1429, \"Partrich\" and \"Pecok enhakill\" were served, alleged by some modern writers to consist of cooked peacock mounted in its skin on a peacock-filled pie. Cooked birds were frequently placed by European royal cooks on top of a large pie to identify its contents, leading to its later adaptation in pre-Victorian times as a porcelain ornament to release of steam and identify a good pie.\n\nThe Pilgrim fathers and early settlers brought their pie recipes with them to America, adapting to the ingredients and techniques available to them in the New World. Their first pies were based on berries and fruits pointed out to them by the Native North Americans. Pies allowed colonial cooks to stretch ingredients and also used round shallow pans to literally \"cut corners\" and to create a regional variation of shallow pie.\n\nMeat pies with fillings such as steak, cheese, steak and kidney, minced beef, or chicken and mushroom are popular in the United Kingdom, Australia, South Africa and New Zealand as take-away snacks. They are also served with chips as an alternative to fish and chips at British chip shops.\n\nPot pies with a flaky crust and bottom are also a popular American dish, typically with a filling of meat (particularly beef, chicken, or turkey), gravy, and mixed vegetables (potatoes, carrots, and peas). Frozen pot pies are often sold in individual serving size.\n\nFruit pies may be served with a scoop of ice cream, a style known in North America as pie à la mode. Many sweet pies are served this way. Apple pie is a traditional choice, though any pie with sweet fillings may be served \"à la mode\". This combination, and possibly the name as well, is thought to have been popularized in the mid-1890s in the United States. Apple pie can be done with a variety of apples: Golden Delicious, Pink Lady, Granny Smith, and Rome Beauty.\n\nCream filled or topped pies are favorite props for slapstick humor. Throwing a pie in a person's face has been a staple of film comedy since Ben Turpin received one in \"Mr. Flip\" in 1909. More recently, pieing has also become a political act; some activists throw cream pies at politicians and other public figures as a form of protest.\n\n\nSome of these pies are pies in name only, such as the Boston cream pie, which is a cake. Many fruit and berry pies are very similar, varying only the fruit used in filling. Fillings for sweet or fruity are often mixed, such as strawberry rhubarb pie.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "91196", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=91196", "title": "Coffee in Italy", "text": "Coffee in Italy\n\nCaffè () is the Italian word for coffee and probably originates from \"Kaffa\" (), the region in Ethiopia where coffee originated. The Muslims first used and distributed it worldwide from the port of Mocha in Yemen, after which the Europeans named it \"mokka\". \"Caffè\" may refer to the Italian way of preparing a coffee, an espresso, or occasionally used as a synonym for the European coffee bar.\n\nItalians are well known for their special attention to the preparation, the selection of the blends, and the use of accessories when creating many types of coffees.\n\nNormally, within the espressobar environment, the term caffè denotes straight espresso. When one orders \"\"un caffè\"\" it is normally enjoyed at the bar, standing. The espresso is always served with a saucer and demitasse spoon, and sometimes with a complimentary wrapped chocolate and a small glass of water.\n\nThe instrument used to prepare caffè at home, the \"caffettiera\", is essentially a small steam machine made of a bottom boiler, a central filter which contains the coffee grounds, and an upper cup. In the traditional Moka, water is put in the boiler and the resulting boiling water passes through the coffee grounds, then reaches the cup. The Neapolitan caffettiera operates somewhat differently, and needs to be turned upside down when the drink is ready. Its boiler and cup are therefore interchangeable.\n\nThe quantity of coffee to be put in the filter determines the richness of the final beverage, but special care is needed in order not to block the water from crossing it, in case of an excess of grounds. Some hints prescribe that some small vertical holes are left in the powder by using a fork.\n\nA small flame has to be used to provide an appropriate moderate water pressure; a high pressure makes the water run too quickly, resulting in coffee with little flavour. The flame under the caffettiera has to be turned off ten seconds after the first characteristic noise is heard, and eventually lit again in case the cup was not filled.\n\nA related but separate translation of the Italian \"caffetteria\" is coffee house or café: an establishment in which caffè was traditionally made with a Moka. These places became common in the 19th century specifically for enjoying caffè, while the habit of caffè drinking at home started at the beginning of the 20th century, when caffettiera machines (Mokas) became available to the general public.\n\nIn the older caffetterie \"(Italian, plural)\", frequented by the upper classes, art and culture events were held. So, many \"caffetterie\" acquired cultural importance (like Caffè Greco at 84 Via Condotti, Rome; established in 1760) and became famous meeting points of artists, intellectuals, politicians, etc. This \"caffetterie\" culture was mainly enjoyed by men, while women organised their tea meetings.\n\nThe traditional afternoon serving of caffè has an almost ceremonial formality: the caffè is always brought with a silver pot; porcelain cups (which should be fine china and as plainly decorated as possible) are served on a saucer with their small silver spoon on the right (on the saucer). Sugar is served separately, in porcelain pots, with a separate silver spoon. After taking caffè, smokers are usually allowed to light their cigarettes (the service typically includes a porcelain ashtray). If women are present, it is they who might grant the men permission to smoke. It is not usual to serve pastries or biscuits with afternoon caffè, but an exception can be made in case there are women at the table. The coffee pot has to be left on the table, for a second cup. After-lunch coffee is taken at separate smaller tables, not at the main one, and children are not normally welcome to join adults in such formalities. In the 21st century, as smoking laws and local customs change, caffè drinking becomes less formal overall.\n\nCappuccino is not related to traditional domestic coffee, being made with an espresso machine. However, caffè-latte (also known as a latte in the U.S. and Café au lait in France) is made with a simple mixture of hot coffee and hot milk, and served in cups that are larger than tea cups. Caffetterie usually serve caffè-latte too.\n\nLike bars, coffee houses have a long history of offering environments in which people can easily socialize amongst their own groups and (often) with strangers. This is reflected in language; when people say \"meet for coffee,\" they primarily mean meet to socialize or talk. Historically, coffee houses have been places where people gather, chat, work, write (in particular, the writing of local newspapers), read (in particular, the same local newspapers that were written in coffee houses) and pass the time. Today, coffee houses are much the same -- it's merely that ink and paper have been often replaced with laptops and newspapers have been replaced by blogs.\n\nThe layouts of coffee houses often include smaller nooks and larger, more communal areas. In a more crowded coffee house, it is common for strangers to sit at the same table, even if that table only seats two people. Coffee houses are typically cozy, which encourages communication amongst strangers.\n"}
{"id": "92253", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=92253", "title": "Tepeu", "text": "Tepeu\n\nTepeu is a word of the K'iche' Maya language meaning \"sovereign\" (also \"one who conquers\" or \"one who is victorious\"). The title is associated with the god Q'uq'umatz of the K'iche'-Maya, one of the creation gods of the Popol Vuh; his whole name translating as \"Sovereign Plumed Serpent\". The title has also been used by numerous K'iche' rulers such as Tepepul.\n\nThe word originated from the Nahuatl \"Tepeuh\".\n"}
{"id": "92271", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=92271", "title": "Hunab Ku", "text": "Hunab Ku\n\nHunab Ku () is a Colonial period Yucatec Maya \"reducido\" term meaning \"The One God\". It is used in colonial, and more particularly in doctrinal texts to refer to the Christian God. Since the word is found frequently in the Chilam Balam of Chumayel, a syncretistic document heavily influenced by Christianity, it refers specifically to the Christian god as a translation into Maya of the Christian concept of one God, used to enculturate the previously polytheist Maya to the new Colonial religion. \n\nReferences to Hunab Ku have figured prominently in New Age Mayanism such as that of José Argüelles.\n\nThe earliest known publicly available written reference to the term \"Hunab Ku\" (which translates as \"Sole God\" or \"Only God\") appears in the 16th century \"Diccionario de Motul\", where \"Hunab-ku\" is identified as \"the only living and true god, also the greatest of the gods of the people of Yucatan. He had no form because they said that he could not be represented as he was incorporeal\". The term also appears in the \"Book of Chilam Balam of Chumayel\", written after the Spanish Conquest, but is unknown in any pre-Conquest inscriptions in Maya writing. Hunab Ku was closely associated with an indigenous creator god, Itzamna, in an effort to make use of religious syncretism. An assertion that Hunab Ku was the high god of the Mayas can be found in Sylvanus Morley's classic book \"The Ancient Maya\" (1946). It is necessary to refer to Mayan authors to verify the Mayan origin and use of this.\n\nHowever, the interpretation of Hunab Ku as a pre-Hispanic deity is not widely accepted by Mayanist scholars today. Anthropological linguist William Hanks, for example, identifies \"hunab ku\" as an expression created in the context of \"maya reducido,\" a form of Yucatec created in the context of missionization. He writes, \"The use of \"hunab ku\" ['one' + suffix + 'god'] for the singularity of God is linguistically transparent to the oneness of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit and occurs widely in the missionary writings. He also notes, \"the fact that close paraphrases make reference to \"Dios,\" \"halal ku\", and \"hunab ku\" allows us to securely identify \"hunab ku\" with the Christian God, even when surrounding text may be ambiguous.\"\n\nNew Age beliefs about Hunab Ku derive from the work of Mexican philosopher Domingo Martínez Parédez (1904–1984), who first presented his interpretation of the concept in 1953 and expanded upon his ideas in a subsequent book, \"Hunab Kú: Síntesis del pensamiento filosófico maya\" (1964). Martínez interpreted Hunab Ku as evidence for Maya monotheism and suggested that it was represented by the symbols of a square within a circle or a circle within a square, the square representing measurement and the circle representing motion. Martínez related Hunab Ku to concepts and symbols in Freemasonry, particularly the idea of a Great Architect of the Universe and the Masonic square and compass. It was also Martínez who first associated Hunab Ku with the expression \"\"In Lak'ech\",\" which he translated as \"Eres mi otro yo.\" (In English, this means \"You are my other I.\") Martínez' ideas were popularized by Hunbatz Men and José Argüelles. The significance of the symbol has also been discussed by José Castillo Torre\n\nAfter being introduced to the concept by Hunbatz Men, who discussed this concept in his 1986 book \"Religión ciencia maya\", Argüelles popularized Hunab Ku in his 1987 book \"The Mayan Factor\". However, instead of Martínez' symbol, what Argüelles asserted was the \"Hunab Ku\" symbol was originally a rectangular design used by the Aztecs for a ritual cloak, known as the Mantle of Lip Plugs (or, arguably, mantle of \"spider water\"). The design survives today as a rug design being sold in central Mexico, but was associated with the Milky Way and the god Hunab Ku by Argüelles, who modified the symbol to look more like a circular motif evoking a yin and yang symbol as well as a spiral galaxy or the blood dropped by Hunab Ku on the bones that Quetzalcoatl took from Ah Puch to create humanity. It has become associated with Mayanism.\n\nThe earliest known appearance of the design is in the 16th century Codex Magliabechiano, an Aztec (not Maya) document that is also known for graphic depictions of heart sacrifice drawn by indigenous artists. The design was first reproduced by Zelia Nuttall, who rediscovered the Codex Magliabecchiano in Florence, Italy in 1898, in her 1901 book \"The Fundamental Principles of Old and New World Civilizations: A Comparative Research Based on a Study of the Ancient Mexican Religious, Sociological and Calendrical Systems.\" Facsimiles of the codex were published in 1903 and 1982. In 1976, the design was introduced to the weavers of Teotitlan, Oaxaca by epigrapher Gordon Whittaker, who commissioned a rug based on the design in the Codex Magliabbechiano. By 1978, it had been reproduced multiple times. Argüelles says he purchased two rugs from Teotitlan with the design, which he subsequently modified and popularized in his book \"The Mayan Factor\" (1987) and during the 1987 Harmonic Convergence.\n\nThe design, rendered in black-and-white, appeared on the cover and on decorated pages of \"The House of the Dawn\" (1914), a romance novel by Marah Ellis Ryan set in Hopi territory during the Pueblo Revolt of 1680. Decorative borders on pages in the book combine this design with the swastika, a motif that also appears frequently in other books by Ryan. It is likely that the illustrator for Ryan's book found the Aztec design in Nuttall's 1903 publication. John Major Jenkins, who first saw the symbol as used by Argüelles, subsequently encountered Ryan's novel in a used book store. He appropriated the decorated borders for use in his zine \"Jaloj Kexoj and PHI-64: The Dual Principle Core Paradigm of Mayan Time Philosophy and its Conceptual Parallel in Old World Thought\" (1994) and also a version republished with modifications as the zine \"Aztec Sacred Science\" (1994).\n\nDespite the assertions of Martínez, Argüelles, and Jenkins, there are no known representations of \"Hunab Ku\" that have been documented for the ancient Maya. It is an Aztec, not a Maya motif.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "93486", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=93486", "title": "Crunchy Frog", "text": "Crunchy Frog\n\nCrunchy Frog is a fictional confection originating from a Monty Python sketch titled \"Trade Description Act\", inspired by the Trade Descriptions Act 1968 in British law.\n\nMr. Milton, the owner of the Whizzo Chocolate Company (Terry Jones) is approached by two members of the Hygiene Squad, Inspector Praline (John Cleese) and Superintendent Parrot (Graham Chapman). The officers confront him about the odd flavours that are used in the Whizzo Quality Assortment, and cite inadequate descriptions of his products as a violation of the Trade Descriptions Act. They ask him to explain the confection labelled \"Crunchy Frog\". Milton describes it as an entire frog that has been coated with chocolate, using only \"the finest baby frogs, dew picked and flown from Iraq, cleansed in finest quality spring water, lightly killed, and then sealed in a succulent Swiss quintuple smooth treble cream milk chocolate envelope and lovingly frosted with glucose.\" Circular logic is used to explain why the bones aren't taken out: \"If we took the bones out, it wouldn't be crunchy, would it?\"\n\nOther questionable items include the Cherry Fondue, which is \"extremely nasty\", but not worthy of prosecution, Ram's Bladder Cup (made from \"fresh Cornish Ram's bladder, emptied, steamed, flavoured with sesame seeds whipped into a fondant and garnished with lark's vomit\"), Cockroach Cluster, Anthrax Ripple, and Spring Surprise (chocolate wrapped around two stainless steel bolts that \"spring out and plunge straight through both [of the victim's] cheeks\"). At the end of the scene Milton is arrested, and the Superintendent, who has been vomiting during the entire conversation (having sampled the Crunchy Frog and some of the others), faces the camera and warns the public to \"take more care when buying its sweeties\".\n\nA later sketch in the same episode features a North American Indian, played in stereotypical fashion by Eric Idle, eating a Crunchy Frog and indicating approval.\n\nThe film \"Monty Python Live at the Hollywood Bowl\" also contains a performance of this sketch, with Chapman as the Inspector and Terry Gilliam as his assistant. The assistant is now called Constable Clitoris, and while he too periodically leaves the room to fight off his nausea, he remains onstage during his last attack of sickness and vomits into his helmet—which he is then ordered by his superior to put back on his head. (Gilliam filled his mouth with cold beef stew when he ran off stage during the scene.)\n\nThe \"Monty Python Live (Mostly)\" stage show features a similar performance, with some small changes to the dialogue - e.g., the Ram's Bladder Cup sweet is now described as having been garnished with mouse faeces rather than lark's vomit - and with Cleese as the Inspector. Jones appears to be reading some of his dialogue from the insert cards in the chocolate box. The televised 20 July 2014 performance includes some fluffs and corpsing, and a moment in which Cleese takes a card from Jones and reads his line for him before announcing \"This is me now\" and continuing with his own line.\n\n"}
{"id": "93493", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=93493", "title": "Tourin", "text": "Tourin\n\nTourin () is a type of French garlic soup, also known as \"le tourin d'ail doux\", or \"smooth garlic soup\". Many regions have their own variations on the recipe. Typically, many recipes include as many as 20 cloves of garlic for a much stronger flavor. However other recipes include an equal measure of both onions and garlic to even out the taste. To prepare, the minced garlic (and sliced onions if included) are sauteed until soft and a simple roux is made by adding flour. Chicken stock or water is added to the mixture and is simmered over low heat to reduce. Egg whites are slowly drizzled in, not unlike egg drop soup, but whisked very rapidly to prevent large curds from forming. It is further thickened by tempering an egg yolk mixed with vinegar, which is then added to the soup.\n\n"}
{"id": "93531", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=93531", "title": "Wakinyan", "text": "Wakinyan\n\nWakíŋyaŋ is a Lakota word for \"thunder.\"\n\nThe word is usually translated as \"Thunder Spirits\", \"Thunder Beings,\" or \"Thunder Birds\". Heyokas, that is contrarians, dream of Wakinyan and can burn cedar (\"Juniperus scopulorum\") to protect themselves from thunder and lightning, since Wakinyan respects and will not harm that tree.\n"}
{"id": "94786", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=94786", "title": "Leffe", "text": "Leffe\n\nLeffe is a premium beer brand owned by InBev Belgium, the European operating arm of the global Anheuser–Busch InBev brewery giant. There are several beers in the range, and they are marketed as Abbey beers. They are brewed in large quantities and are widely distributed.\n\nThe abbey of Leffe was founded in 1152 on the Meuse River in the province of Namur in southern Belgium. Like many monasteries across Europe, the Premonstratensian (Norbertine) canons of the abbey brewed ale, starting in 1240. Using knowledge passed from generation to generation and ingredients found in the wild near the abbey, the canons developed a unique ale with a subtle taste and high alcohol content, brewed only at the abbey.\n\nThe abbey has been damaged by both natural and human circumstances over the years: it was destroyed by a flood in 1460, a fire swept through the settlement in 1466, billeted troops damaged the brewery in 1735, and the outbreak of the French Revolution in 1794 resulted in it being abandoned and the brewery destroyed. The canons returned in 1902.\n\nIn 1952, the production of beer was continued after a partnership with the Flemish based Lootvoet brewery in Overijse. This brewery was later bought by the international beer company Interbrew (now AB InBev). Leffe was then brewed in Mont-Saint-Guibert until Interbrew closed that brewery. Now all Leffe brands are brewed at the Stella Artois brewery in Leuven.\n\nThe 1952 agreement between the Leffe abbey and a commercial brewery is said to have been the first of its kind (royalties continue to be paid to the abbey). Today, Belgium's \"abbey\" beers are thriving with several beers brewed under similar licences to Leffe as well as abbey beers named after abbey ruins or abbeys that no longer exist. The Affligem and Grimbergen beers are a part of Heineken's international portfolio. Other notable abbey brands include Corsendonk.\n\nThe Leffe museum in the town of Dinant is open to visitors.\n\n"}
{"id": "95411", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=95411", "title": "Gnocchi", "text": "Gnocchi\n\nGnocchi ( , , ; , singular \"gnocco\") are various thick, small, and soft dough dumplings that may be made from semolina, ordinary wheat flour, egg, cheese, potato, breadcrumbs, cornmeal, or similar ingredients, and possibly including flavourings of herbs, vegetables, cocoa, or prunes. The dough for gnocchi is most often rolled out before it is cut into small pieces about the size of a wine cork. The little dumplings are then pressed with a fork or a cheese grater to make ridges that can hold sauce. Alternatively, they are simply cut into little lumps. Gnocchi are usually eaten as a replacement for pasta in the first course, but they can also be served as a \"contorno\" (side dish) to some main courses.\nLike many Italian dishes, gnocchi have considerable variation in recipes and names across different regions. For example, Lombard and Tuscan \"malfatti\" (literally \"poorly made\") are made with ricotta, flour and spinach, as well as the addition of various other herbs if required. Tuscan gnudi distinctively contains less flour; but some varieties are flour-based, like the Campanian \"strangulaprievete\", the Apulian \"cavatielli\", the Sardinian \"malloreddus\", and so on. Gnocchi are commonly cooked on their own in salted boiling water and then dressed with various sauces depending on the type of gnocchi and recipe used. Some gnocchi can be made from pieces of cooked polenta or semolina, which are spread out to dry, and then layered with cheese and butter and finished in the oven.\nGnocchi are eaten as a first course (\"primo piatto\") as an alternative to soups (\"minestre\") or pasta. Common accompaniments of gnocchi include melted butter with sage, pesto, as well as various sauces. They are generally homemade in Italian and Italian-immigrant households. They may also be bought fresh from specialty stores. In supermarkets, industrially produced, packaged gnocchi are widely available either refrigerated, dried, or frozen. \nGnocchi can be purchased ready-made from grocery stores or they can be handmade. Their preparation is similar to pasta, as they are cooked by boiling them in water and then they are served with a sauce. If miniature gnocchi are wanted for soup, they can be made by pressing gnocchi dough through a coarse sieve or a perforated spoon.\n\nThe word \"gnocchi\" may be derived from the Italian word \"nocchio\", meaning a knot in wood, or from \"nocca\" (meaning knuckle). It has been a traditional type of Italian pasta of (probable) Middle Eastern origin since Roman times. It was introduced by the Roman legions during the expansion of the empire into the countries of the European continent. In Roman times, gnocchi were made from a semolina porridge-like dough mixed with eggs, and are still found in similar forms today, particularly the oven-baked \"gnocchi alla romana\" and Sardinia's \"malloreddus\" which do not contain eggs.\n\nThe use of potato is a relatively recent innovation, occurring after the introduction of the potato to Europe in the 16th century. Potato gnocchi are particularly popular in Abruzzo, Friuli-Venezia Giulia, Veneto, and Lazio. As with other mashed potato dishes they are best prepared with starchy potatoes to keep a light texture.\n\nA study conducted with the potato puree showed that, between two samples analyzed, the product which engaged in dual lower pressure treatments resulted in the most suitable production of gnocchi in terms of physicochemical and textural properties. However, it did not provide evidence for aggregation phenomena responsible for the hard lumps, which may occur in this type of semi-finished product. Moreover, the textural properties of gnocchi dough were not influenced by the different formulation as was expected.\n\nAmong the ingredients involved in the preparation of the different samples, what seemed to be the biggest factor affecting the quality features of gnocchi dough was soft wheat flour. As a result of the interactive effect of the ingredients on the physicochemical and textural traits of the different types of dough, a uniform and well-defined division among the samples was not obtained. When comparing the different kinds of gnocchi, the optimal physicochemical and textural properties were detected in the sample, which was made with fresh tubers. Not only was this caused by the use of fresh steam cooked in potatoes, but the pasteurized liquid eggs and the absence of any kind of emulsifier, additive, or preserving substance played a role as well.\n\nGnocchi that are home-made are usually consumed on the same day that they are made, whereas industrially manufactured gnocchi have a shelf life of approximately two months at .\n\nCommercial gnocchi are often sold under modified atmospheric packaging, and may achieve a shelf life of two weeks under refrigeration.\n\nOne variety, \"gnocchi di pane\" (literally \"bread lumps\"), derived from the \"Semmelknödel\", is made from breadcrumbs and is popular in Friuli-Venezia Giulia, Veneto and Trentino-Alto Adige/Südtirol. Another variety from the latter region is spinach gnocchi.\n\nIn Austria, gnocchi are a common main or side dish, known by the original name and Austrian variant, \"nockerl\" (pl. \"nockerln\"). As a side dish, they may accompany main dishes like goulash.\n\nGnocchi are a very popular and often served as a dish in coastal Croatia, typically being served as a first course or a side dish with Dalmatinska pašticada. The Croatian name for Gnocchi is 'njoki'.\n\nAn almost identical creation are 'kluski leniwe' (\"lazy noodles\"), but do not contain egg. Often they are spiced with various herbs like pepper, cinnamon, allspice, etc. Similar in shape are kopytka (\"hooves\"), simple dough dumplings in the shape of a diamond, which do not contain cheese. Both are often served with sour cream, butter, caramelized onion, mushroom sauce, or gravy.\n\nThe name is also used in France in the dish known as \"gnocchis à la parisienne\", a hot dish comprising gnocchi formed of choux pastry served with Béchamel sauce. A specialty of Nice, the \"gnocchi de tantifla a la nissarda\", is made with potatoes, wheat flour, eggs and \"blette\" (Swiss chard), which is also used for the \"tourte de blette\". \"La merda dé can\" is longer than the original gnocchi.\n\nDue to the significant number of Italian immigrants who arrived in Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay, gnocchi, \"ñoqui\" (Spanish, ) or \"nhoque\" (Portuguese, ) is a popular dish, even in areas with few Italian immigrants. In Brazil, Uruguay, Paraguay, and Argentina there is a tradition of eating gnocchi on the 29th of each month, with some people putting money beneath their plates to bring prosperity. Indeed, in Uruguay and Argentina \"ñoqui\" is slang for a bogus employee (according to corrupt accountancy practices, or, in the public sector, the distribution of political patronage), who only turns up at the end of the month to receive her or his salary.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "95601", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=95601", "title": "Mana", "text": "Mana\n\nMana, in Austronesian languages, means \"power\", \"effectiveness\", and \"prestige\". In most cases, this power and its source are understood to be supernatural and inexplicable. Its semantics are language-dependent. The concept is significant in Polynesian culture and is part of contemporary Pacific Islander culture; it came to the attention of Western anthropologists through reports from island missionaries. Its study was included in cultural anthropology—specifically, the anthropology of religion. Links were seen between \"mana\" and earlier phases of Western religion: animism at first, followed by pre-animism.\n\nAccording to the POLLEX Project, a protoform (an ancestral form of a word) for \"mana\"—noted in historical-linguistic convention as *mana-\"—existed in Proto-Oceanic, the precursor of many Pacific languages. Although the path through the tree from Proto-Oceanic to a specific language is not always clear, the word and concept are thousands of years old. According to linguist Robert Blust, \"mana\" means \"thunder, storm, or wind\" in some languages. Blust hypothesized that the term originally meant \"powerful forces of nature such as thunder and storm winds that were conceived as the expression of an unseen supernatural agency. As Oceanic-speaking peoples spread eastward, the notion of an unseen supernatural agency became detached from the physical forces of nature that had inspired it and assumed a life of its own.\"\n\nMana is a foundation of the Polynesian worldview, a spiritual quality with a supernatural origin and a sacred, impersonal force. To have \"mana\" implies influence, authority, and efficacy—the ability to perform in a given situation. The quality of \"mana\" is not limited to individuals; peoples, governments, places and inanimate objects may also possess \"mana\", and its possessors are accorded respect.\n\nIn Hawaiian and Tahitian culture, mana is a spiritual energy and healing power which can exist in places, objects and persons. Hawaiians believe that mana may be gained or lost by actions, and Hawaiians and Tahitians believe that mana is both external and internal. Sites on the Hawaiian Islands and in French Polynesia are believed to possess mana—for example, the top rim of the Haleakalā volcano on the island of Maui and the Taputapuatea marae on the island of Raiatea in the Society Islands.\n\nAncient Hawaiian believed that the island of Molokaʻi possesses mana, compared with its neighboring islands. Before the unification of Hawaii by King Kamehameha I, battles were fought for possession of the island and its south-shore fish ponds which existed until the late 19th century.\n\nA person may gain mana by \"pono\" (right actions). In ancient Hawaii, there were two paths to mana: sexual means or violence. Nature is dualistic, and everything has a counterpart. A balance between the gods Kū and Lono formed, through whom are the two paths to mana (\"ʻimihaku\", or the search for mana). Kū, the god of war and politics, offers mana through violence; this was how Kamehameha gained his mana. Lono, the god of peace and fertility, offers mana through sexuality.\n\nIn Māori, a tribe with \"mana whenua\" must have demonstrated their authority over a territory. In Māori culture, there are two essential aspects of a person's mana: \"mana tangata\", authority derived from whakapapa (genealogy) and \"mana huaanga\", defined as \"authority derived from having a wealth of resources to gift to others to bind them into reciprocal obligations\". Hemopereki Simon, from Ngāti Tūwharetoa, asserts that there are many forms of mana in Maori culture. The indigenous word reflects a non-Western view of reality, complicating translation. This is confirmed by the definition of mana provided by Maori Marsden who states that mana is:Spiritual power and authority as opposed to the purely psychic and natural force — ihi.According to Prof. Margaret Mutu mana in its traditional sense means:Power, authority, ownership, status, influence, dignity, respect derived from the god[/atua].In terms of leadership Ngāti Kahungunu legal scholar Carwyn Jones comments that, \"mana is the central concept that underlies Māori leadership and accountability.\" He also considers mana as a fundamental aspect of the constitutional traditions of Māori society.\n\nAccording to the New Zealand Ministry of Justice:\n\nIn contemporary New Zealand English, the word \"mana\", taken from the Māori, refers to a person or organisation of people of great personal prestige and character. The increased use of the term mana in New Zealand society is as a result of the politicisation of Maori issues stemming from the Māori Renaissance.\n\nMissionary Robert Henry Codrington traveled widely in Melanesia, publishing several studies of its language and culture. His 1891 book \"The Melanesians: Studies in their Anthropology and Folk-Lore\" contains the first detailed description of mana. Codrington defines it as \"a force altogether distinct from physical power, which acts in all kinds of ways for good and evil, and which it is of the greatest advantage to possess or control\".\n\nHis era had already defined animism, the concept that the energy (or life) in an object derives from a spiritual component. Georg Ernst Stahl's 18th-century animism was adopted by Edward Burnett Tylor, the founder of cultural anthropology, who presented his initial ideas about the history of religion in his 1865 \"Researches into the Early History of Mankind\" and developed them in volumes one (1871) and two (1874) of \"Primitive Culture\".\n\nIn Tylor's cultural anthropology, other primates (from which evolutionists hypothesized man had evolved) did not appear to possess culture.\n\nTylor did not try to find evidence of a non-cultural human state because he considered it unreachable, \"a condition not far removed from that of the lower animals\" and \"savage life as in some sort representing an early known state.\" He described such a hypothetical state as \"the human savage naked in both mind and body, and destitute of laws, or arts, or ideas, and almost of language\". According to Tylor, speculation about an acultural state is impossible. Using the method of comparative culture, similar to comparative anatomy and the comparative method of historical linguistics and following John Lubbock, he drew up a dual classification of cultural traits (memes and memeplexes): savage and civilised. Tylor wrote, \"From an ideal point of view, civilization may be looked upon as the general improvement of mankind by higher organization of the individual and of society ... \" and identified his model with the \"progression-theory of civilization\".\n\nTylor cited a \"minimum definition\" of religion as \"the belief in Spiritual Beings\". Noting that no savage societies lack religion and that the initial state of a religious man is beyond reach, he enumerated two stages in the evolution of religion: a simple belief in individual animae (or Doctrine of Souls) and the elaboration of dogmas. The dogmas are systems of higher spirits commanding phases of nature. In volume two of \"Primitive Culture\", Tylor called this stage the Doctrine of Spirits. He used the word \"animism\" in two different senses. The first is religion itself: a belief in the spiritual as an effective energy, shared by every specific religion. In his progression theory, an undogmatic version preceded rational theological systems. Animism is the simple Theory of the Soul, which comparative religion attempts to reconstruct.\n\nTylor's work predated Codrington's, and he was unfamiliar with the latter. The concept of mana occasioned a revision of Tylor's view of the evolution of religion. The first anthropologist to formulate a revision (which he called \"pre-animistic religion\") was Robert Ranulph Marett, in a series of papers collected and published as \"Threshold of Religion\". In its preface he takes credit for the adjective \"pre-animistic\" but not the noun \"pre-animism\", although he does not attribute it.\n\nAccording to Marett, \"Animism will not suffice as a minimum definition of religion.\" Tylor had used the term \"natural religion\", consistent with Georg Ernst Stahl's concept of a natural spiritual energy. The soul of an animal, for example, is its vital principle. Marett wrote, \"One must dig deeper\" to find the \"roots of religion\".\n\nDescribing pre-animism, Marett cited the Melanesian mana (primarily with Codrington's work): \"When the science of Comparative Religion employs a native expression such as mana ... it is obliged to disregard to some extent its original or local meaning ... Science, then, may adopt mana as a general category ... \". In Melanesia the \"animae\" are the souls of living men, the ghosts of deceased men, and spirits \"of ghost-like appearance\" or imitating living people. Spirits can inhabit other objects, such as animals or stones.\n\nThe most significant property of mana is that it is distinct from, and exists independently of, its source. \"Animae\" act only through mana. It is impersonal, undistinguished, and (like energy) transmissible between objects, which can have more or less of it. Mana is perceptible, appearing as a \"Power of awfulness\" (in the sense of awe or wonder). Objects possessing it impress an observer with \"respect, veneration, propitiation, service\" emanating from the mana's power. Marett lists a number of objects habitually possessing mana: \"startling manifestations of nature\", \"curious stones\", animals, \"human remains\", blood, thunderstorms, eclipses, eruptions, glaciers, and the sound of a bullroarer.\n\nIf mana is a distinct power, it may be treated distinctly. Marett distinguishes spells, which treat mana quasi-objectively, and prayers (which address the \"anima\"). An \"anima\" may have departed, leaving mana in the form of a spell which can be addressed by magic. Although Marett postulates an earlier pre-animistic phase, a \"rudimentary religion\" or \"magico-religious\" phase in which the mana figures without \"animae\", \"no island of pure 'pre-animism' is to be found.\" Like Tylor, he theorizes a thread of commonality between animism and pre-animism identified with the supernatural—the \"mysterious\", as opposed to the reasonable.\n\nIn 1936, Ian Hogbin criticised the universality of Marett's pre-animism: \"Mana is by no means universal and, consequently, to adopt it as a basis on which to build up a general theory of primitive religion is not only erroneous but indeed fallacious\". However, Marett intended the concept as an abstraction. Spells, for example, may be found \"from Central Australia to Scotland.\"\n\nEarly 20th-century scholars also saw mana as a universal concept, found in all human cultures and expressing fundamental human awareness of a sacred life energy. In his 1904 essay, \"Outline of a General Theory of Magic\", Marcel Mauss drew on the writings of Codrington and others to paint a picture of mana as \"power \"par excellence\", the genuine effectiveness of things which corroborates their practical actions without annihilating them\". Mauss pointed out the similarity of mana to the Iroquois orenda and the Algonquian manitou, convinced of the \"universality of the institution\"; \"a concept, encompassing the idea of magical power, was once found everywhere\".\n\nMauss and his collaborator, Henri Hubert, were criticised for this position when their 1904 \"Outline of a General Theory of Magic\" was published. \"No one questioned the existence of the notion of mana\", wrote Mauss's biographer Marcel Fournier, \"but Hubert and Mauss were criticized for giving it a universal dimension\". Criticism of mana as an archetype of life energy increased. According to Mircea Eliade, the idea of mana is not universal; in places where it is believed, not everyone has it, and \"even among the varying formulae (\"mana\", \"wakan\", \"orenda\", etc.) there are, if not glaring differences, certainly nuances not sufficiently observed in the early studies\". \"With regard to these theories founded upon the primordial and universal character of mana, we must say without delay that they have been invalidated by later research\".\n\nLarry Niven adopted the term in his 1969 short story, \"Not Long Before the End\". In this and subsequent stories, \"mana\" was the magical fuel used to cast spells. It was a non-renewable environmental resource; heavy use of magic could deplete the mana in an area.\n\nFollowing on from the idea of mana as something that could be \"used up\", fantasy role-playing games and video games adopted the term to quantify \"magical power.\" Magic points (MPs) were used by \"\" and games influenced by it, and for example the 1987 video game \"Dungeon Master\" replaced \"magic points\" with \"mana points\" as the definition of MPs.\n\nMana was used in a number of early role-playing board games. In 1993, the collectible card game \"\" used mana terminology. Blizzard Entertainment's \"\" called its MPs \"mana\", influenced by \"Magic: The Gathering\". \"Diablo\" (1996) also used mana terminology; the two games' sequels and spin-offs, including \"World of Warcraft\", popularized the term \"mana\".\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "95809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=95809", "title": "Huna (New Age)", "text": "Huna (New Age)\n\nHuna is a Hawaiian word adopted by Max Freedom Long (1890–1971) in 1936 to describe his theory of metaphysics. Long cited what he believed to be the spiritual practices of ancient Hawaiian kahunas (priests) as inspiration; however, the system is his invention, with roots in New Thought and Theosophy, rather than in traditional Hawaiian beliefs. Huna is part of the New Age movement.\n\nMax Freedom Long, who was not Hawaiian, went to Hawaii in 1917 to work as an elementary school teacher. He became interested in the religious beliefs and practices of the ancient kahunas and modern practitioners of traditional, indigenous Hawaiian religion, but none of the ceremonial people talked to him so he was unable to penetrate to the inner workings of this religion. He left Hawaii in 1931, convinced that he would never learn these secrets. In 1934, he woke with a revelation that the secrets were encoded into the Hawaiian language itself. He called the religious system he developed from this revelation 'Huna' (the Hawaiian word for secret), and wrote his first book in 1936 to chronicle his beliefs. There are no accepted Hawaiian sources that refer to the word 'Huna' as a tradition of esoteric learning.\n\nIn 1945 Long founded Huna Research. In 1953, he published \"The Secret Science at Work\" as a Huna textbook, and in 1965 \"The Huna Codes in Religions\", examining parallels between his invented system and religions such as Hinduism, Buddhism and Christianity.\n\nThe New Age practice of Huna emphasizes practical living and harmony with three levels of consciousness or selves. Long claimed that a low, middle, and higher self were recognized by the ancient kahunas. Long called these selves the \"unihipili\" (subconscious, inner, emotional, intuitive), \"uhane\" (waking consciousness, rational) and \"aumakua\" (super-conscious, connection with the divine), however these are not the Hawaiian meanings of these words. Long also redefined the Hawaiian concept of \"mana\", (privileged as a divine power in traditional Hawaiian belief), and presented it instead as a vitalizing life force, which can, with knowledge of the three selves, be used in a manner of \"personal empowerment\" to heal body and mind and achieve life goals. \n\nLong believed he had discovered an ancient Truth, not just about Hawaiian spirituality but linking back to India and ancient Egypt. He believed Hawaiians were a lost tribe of Berbers. He wrote that spiritual adepts migrated to Hawai‘i from Egypt, passing on to the priests of India some of their basic beliefs.\n\nLong linked Huna to Theosophy and New Thought movements of the time. He wrote that the Christian Scientists understood positive thinking better than any group he knew, and encouraged his readers to subscribe to Unity Church’s magazine, \"Daily Word\". Later Huna teachers have placed it firmly in the New Age, with Serge King claiming that Huna came originally from aliens from the Pleiades who were remnants of the mythical advanced civilizations of Mu or Lemuria, and Pila Chiles associating the islands with the New Age versions/interpretations of chakras, vortexes and ley lines.\n\nAccording to critics, Serge King misappropriated and attempted to redefine three Hawaiian language words for his idea of \"the three selves\": \"Ku,\" \"Lono,\" and \"Kane.\" However, the meanings he gives these words are not the meanings of the words in Hawaiian. King wrote that the seven principles of Huna are:\n\n\nNative speakers, scholars and dictionaries concur that the meanings King gives for these words do not reflect their usage in the Hawaiian language, nor any traditional Hawaiian beliefs. King also calls what he does \"shamanism\" and cites \"West African shamanism\" as an influence.\n\nMax Freedom Long wrote that he obtained many of his case studies and his ideas about what to look for in kahuna magic from the Director of the Bishop Museum in Honolulu, William Brigham. According to an article in the peer-reviewed \"Hawaiian Journal of History,\" there is no credible evidence that the two men met. Even if they did, Brigham was not an expert on kahunas and did not document in his own writings any of the incidents Long ascribed to him, including walking on hot lava. In his letters and manuscripts, Brigham stated that Hawaiians were \"an inferior race,\" and implied they were lazy. He referred to Queen Lili'uokalani as a \"she devil,\" \"squaw,\" and \"nigger.\"\n\nNative Hawaiian scholar Charles Kenn, a Living Treasure of Hawai'i, recognized in the Hawaiian community as a \"kahuna\" and expert in Hawaiian history and traditions, was friendly with Max Freedom Long but said, “While this Huna study is an interesting study, … it is not, and never was Hawaiian.”\n\nPali Jae Lee, a research librarian at the Bishop Museum, and author of the classic book, \"Tales From the Night Rainbow\", conducted extensive research on Max Freedom Long and Huna. She concluded, based on her interviews with Hawaiian elders, \"Huna is not Hawaiian.\" Lee cites Theodore Kelsey, a Living Treasure of Hawai'i renowned for his work as a Hawaiian translator who wrote a letter to Long in 1936 (now in the Hawai'i State Archives) criticizing his use of the terms \"unihipili\" and \"aumakua.\"\n\nAuthor Nancy Kahalewai, a teacher of lomilomi massage, wrote that \"traditional lomilomi practitioners do not teach this philosophy. In fact, most insist that it is not from the native Hawaiian culture at all.\"\n\nWells College Professor Lisa Kahaleole Hall, Ph.D., a Native Hawaiian, wrote in a peer-reviewed journal published by the University of Hawai'i that Huna \"bears absolutely no resemblance to any Hawaiian worldview or spiritual practice\" and calls it part of the \"New Age spiritual industry.\"\n\nMikael Rothstein, an associate professor of religious history at the University of Copenhagen in Denmark, is the author of several books on religious history and new religious movements. He wrote about Huna in a peer-reviewed anthology:\nRather than integrating Hawaiian religion, however, New Agers seem to carry out a radical reinterpretation of this tradition, or simply invent traditions that were never Hawaiian. … New Age representations redefine Hawaiian concepts in order to align them to basic New Age trends.\nRothstein also gathered opinions and analysis of Huna by native Hawaiians:\nAccording to leading figures on the native-political scene in Hawaii, this kind of New Age representation amounts to straightforward exploitation. People often feel that non-Hawaiians are violating native intellectual property rights and that the out-of-context use of Hawaii’s religious legacy cripples the values that are imbedded in concepts such as kahuna, hula, Lomi Lomi, etc. The very idea that anyone could join a workshop and develop kahuna skills within a few weeks, for instance, is considered ridiculous as the traditional kahuna’s knowledge depends on a way of life rather than learning. …By importing Hawaiian ethnicity and revivifying what is perceived to be Hawaii’s religious legacy, New Agers from Europe and the United States…do not need the Hawaiians themselves. They need a myth about them, and so they create it… \n\nChai writes that Huna books are \"examples of cultural appropriation.\"\n\nAccording to the standard Pukui and Elbert Hawaiian dictionary, 'unihipili are the spirits of deceased persons, 'uhane is a soul, spirit or ghost, and 'aumakua are family or personal gods, deified ancestors who might assume the shape of animals. Kū, Lono and Kāne are Hawaiian gods.\n\nIn the Hawaiian language, the term \"kahuna\" is used for any expert. Kahuna include experts in diagnosing illness, herbal medicine, canoe building, temple building, wood carving, star-gazing, agriculture, and others.\n\nHuna Research Inc was founded by Long in 1945. On his death in 1971, he was succeeded as its head by Dr. E Otha Wingo (in accordance with a request by Long), and moved its headquarters to Missouri, where Wingo was a professor. It has fellowships in Canada, Australia, England, Germany and Switzerland, in addition to the United States.\n\nHuna International was formed as a religious order in 1973 by King. It has three branches: Aloha International, Voices of the Earth and Finding Each Other International.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "95846", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=95846", "title": "Rohe", "text": "Rohe\n\nThe Māori people of New Zealand use the word rohe to describe the territory or boundaries of \"iwi\" (tribes), although some divide their rohe into several \"takiwā\". \n\nThe areas shown on the map (right) are indicative only, and some iwi areas may overlap.\n\nThe term \"rohe\" also combines with other words to form more modern terms. These include \"rohe pōti\", meaning an electoral district or constituency, \"rohe wā\", meaning time zone, and \"whatunga rohe paetata\", meaning a local area network. The term \"rohe\" on its own has also been adopted to mean an internet domain.\n\n"}
{"id": "97841", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=97841", "title": "Pressure frying", "text": "Pressure frying\n\nIn cooking, pressure frying is a variation on pressure cooking where meat and cooking oil are brought to high temperatures while pressure is held high enough to cook the food more quickly. This leaves the meat very hot and juicy. A receptacle used in pressure frying is known as a pressure fryer. The process is most notable for its use in the preparation of fried chicken in many commercial fried chicken restaurants.\n\nPressure frying is mostly done in industrial kitchens. Ordinary home pressure cookers are generally unsuitable for pressure frying, because they are typically designed for a maximum temperature around 121 °C (250 °F) whereas oil can reach temperatures well in excess of 160 °C (320 °F) which may damage the gasket in an ordinary pressure cooker causing it to fail. Second generation cookers are somewhat safer, but can still be dangerous if proper precautions, like opening fill limits, are not taken.\n\n"}
{"id": "98314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=98314", "title": "Hetepet", "text": "Hetepet\n\nIn the Egyptian language, Hetepet was the word that meant \"Offerings\"\nIt was used in multiple occasions, but most prominently in\n"}
{"id": "98415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=98415", "title": "Renpet", "text": "Renpet\n\nRenpet was, in the Egyptian language, the word for \"year\". Its hieroglyph was figuratively depicted in art as a woman wearing a palm shoot (symbolizing time) over her head. She was often referred to as the \"Mistress of Eternity\" and also personified fertility, youth and spring. The glyph regularly appears on monuments and documents throughout Egyptian history as the beginning of the phrase recording the regnal year of the pharaoh.\n\n"}
{"id": "100189", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=100189", "title": "Sri", "text": "Sri\n\nSri, (; Devanagari: श्री, IAST: \"Śrī\" ) also transliterated as Sree, Shri, Shree, Si, or Seri, is a word of Sanskrit origin. Hindus use a popular \"yantra\", or mystical diagram, called Sri Yantra, to worship the goddess of wealth. The term is also used in Indian subcontinent and Southeast Asia as a polite form of address equivalent to the English \"Mr.\" or \"Ms.\" in written and spoken language, but also as a title of veneration for deities; for example, the Hindu goddess of wealth, Lakshmi, is known as Sree. The word is widely used in South and Southeast Asian languages such as Indonesian, Javanese, Balinese, Sinhalese, Thai, Tamil, Hindi, and Malay.\n\n\"Sri\" has a core meaning of \"diffusing light or radiance or eminence\", related to the root \"śrā\" \"to cook, boil\", but as a feminine abstract noun, it has received a general meaning of \"grace, splendour, beauty; wealth, affluence, prosperity\".\n\nDerived forms of address are \"Shrimati\" (abbreviated Smt) for married women and \"Sushri\" for women (regardless of marital status).\n\nIn Devanagari script for Sanskrit, Hindi, and other languages, the word is spelled with three conjoined letters: (śa / sha) – (ra) – (ī, long i). These are distinct from (sa) and (short i). The IAST transliteration is \"śrī\". A common intuitive transliteration is \"shrii\". (Other forms include Hunterian \"zrI\".)\n\nSome other Indian languages do not distinguish (\"sh\" in English) from in speech or for native words, but do retain a distinct spelling for loanwords. For example, Sinhalese and Tamil respectively have: (ශ, ஶ், \"śa\") versus (ස, ஸ், \"sa\"). In these cases, the spelling generally reflects Sanskrit \"śrī\" (\"shri\"), though the pronunciation may be \"sri\", \"seri\", or \"si\".\n\n\"Sri\" is a polite form of address equivalent to the English \"Mr.\" or \"Ms.\".\n\n\"Shri\" is also frequently used as an epithet of some Hindu gods, in which case it is often translated into English as \"Holy\". Also, in language and general usage, \"Shri\", if used by itself and not followed by any name, refers to the supreme consciousness, i.e. God.\n\n\"Shri Devi\" (or in short Shri, another name of Lakshmi, consort of Vishnu) is the devi (goddess) of wealth according to Hindu beliefs. Among today's orthodox Vaishnavas, the English word \"Shree\" is a revered syllable and is used to refer to Lakshmi as the supreme goddess, while \"Sri\" or \"Shri\" is used to address humans.\n\n\"Shri\" is one of the names of Ganesha, the Hindu god of prosperity.\n\n\"Shri\" is also used as a title of the Hindu deities Rama, Krishna, Saraswati, Radha (used as Shrimati Radharani), and sometimes Durga.\n\n\"Shri\" may be repeated depending on the status of the person.\n\n\nSridevi is a form of Lakshmi. She killed Demon Jambasura.\n\n\"Shri\", along with the forms \"Shrimati\" (for married women, equivalent to English Mrs.) and \"Sushri\", is often used by Hindus, Buddhists, Sikhs, and Jains as a respectful affix to the names of celebrated or revered persons.\n\nThere is a common practice of writing \"Shri\" as the first word centralised in line at the beginning of a document.\n\nDuring the Vidyāraṃbhaṃ ceremony, the mantra \"Om hari sri ganapataye namah\" is written in sand or in a tray of rice grains by a child, under the supervision of a Guru or Priest.\n\nAnother usage is as an emphatic compound (which can be used several times: \"shri shri\", or \"shri shri shri\", etc.) in princely styles, notably in Darbar Sri, Desai Shri, and Thakur Sri or Shrii Shrii Anandamurti, the founder of the social and spiritual movement Ananda Marga (the Path of Bliss).\n\nThe honorific can also be applied to objects and concepts that are widely respected, such as the Sikh religious text, the Shri Guru Granth Sahib. Similarly, when the Ramlila tradition of reenacting the Ramayana is referred to as an institution, the term Shri Ramlila is frequently used.\n\nThe use of the term is common in the names of ragas (musical motifs), either as a prefix or postfix. Some examples are Shree, Bageshree, Dhanashree, Malashree, Jayantashree, Rageshree, and Shree ranjani.\n\nThe honorific is incorporated into many place names. A partial list follows:\n"}
{"id": "100252", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=100252", "title": "Ribhus", "text": "Ribhus\n\nRibhus (Sanskrit: ऋभु, ṛbhu, also Arbhu, Rbhus, Ribhuksan) is an ancient Indian word whose meaning evolved over time. In early layers of the Vedic literature, it referred to a sun deity. It evolved to being a wind deity, thereafter referred to three male artisans whose abilities and austerities make them into divinities in later Vedic texts. Their individual names were Ribhu (or Rhibhu), Vaja and Vibhvan (also called Vibhu), but they were collectively called Rhibhus or Ribhus (, pl. ṛbhava, also called Ribhuksan). Their name's meaning is \"clever, skillful, inventive, prudent\", cognate to Latin \"labor\" and Gothic \"arb-aiþs\" \"labour, toil\", and perhaps to English \"elf\".\n\nRibhus are depicted in some legends of the Vedic literature as three sons of the goddess of morning light named \"Saranyu\" and Hindu god Indra. In other legends, such as in the Atharvaveda, they are sons of \"Sudhanvan\", which means good archer. In either legends, they are famous for their creative abilities, innovation and they design chariots, the magic cow of plenty, channels for rivers, and tools for Indra and other gods, which makes many envious. In later Hindu mythology, the Ribhus are born in human form, who then bring their innovation to earth, remain humble and kind. This makes some gods angry, and the Ribhus are refused entry back to heaven. Other gods intervene, and make the inventive Ribhus immortal. They are revered in ancient Hindu texts as sages, as stars or rays of the sun.\n\nThe Ribhus were first mentioned in the oldest Hindu scriptures of the Rigveda, wherein eleven hymns are dedicated to them (RV 1.20, 110, 111, 161, RV 3.60, RV 4.33-37, RV 7.48), and the Atharvaveda. They are said to be the sons of Sudhanvan, a descendant of Angiras. In later Hindu mythology (Vishnu Purana Book 2, Chapters 15 - 16 and the \"Song of Ribhu\") Ribhu (or Rhibhu), supposed to be the leader of them, is said to be a son of Brahma. Unlike that identification the \"Puranic Encyclopedia\" states that this Ribhu is not identical with the leader of the Rhibhus whose name therein is Rbuksan. They are supposed to dwell in the solar sphere; Aitareya Brahmana III, 30 describes them as \"sun's neighbours or pupils\".\n\nThe Ribhus are artists who formed the horses of Indra, the carriage of the Ashvins, and the miraculous cow of Brihaspati, made their parents young, and performed other wonderful works which according to RV 4.51.6 were \"done by the dawn\". According to Yaska they also founded the sacrifices. They are supposed to take their ease and remain every year for twelve days idle in the house of Agohya (an appellation of Aditya which means \"one who cannot be concealed\", therefore the Sun). When the Devas (gods) heard of their skill, they sent Agni to them, bidding them, to construct four cups from the one cup of Tvashtar, the artificer of the devas. When the Ribhus successfully had executed this task, the devas received them among themselves, gave them immortality and allowed them to partake of their sacrifices.\n\nAccording to Yaska and Sayana the Ribhus represent the rays of the sun. David Frawley states about that notion, that \"Vedic gods, like the Adityas, Maruts, Vasus and Rhibhus, often appear as rays of the sun, as stars or constellations\" Bal Gangadhar Tilak, stating that the interpretation of Yaska and Sayana could not explain their number, interpreted them 1893 referring to \"several European scholars\" as representing the three seasons of the year of the early Vedic period. The Satapata Brahmana XIV.I.1.28 mentions \"three divisions of the year\" and in RV 1.164.48 the \"three spokes\" are supposed to mean this three seasons. But Tilak didn't show a relation of their name and works to this interpretation. So Arthur Berriedale Keith 1925 mentioned that \"the assertion that the Rbhus are really the Rthus\" (the seasons) \"is not 'in the slightest degree plausible'\".\n\nAccording to Bal Gangadhar Tilak referring to RV 1.161.13 the twelve days, when the Ribhus rested at the house of Agohya, took place \"at the end of the year\". He describes them as the holiest days of the year of which the ancestors of today's Indians believed, that the devas then would leave heaven to visit the homes of the humans. As David Frawley mentioned in context of the seasons, according to RV 7.103.7 - 8 also as the long Atiratra rite of Soma was celebrated at this time.\n\nBal Gangadhar Tilak further interpreted the hound or dog, which according to RV 1.161.13 woke the Ribhus, as the \"dogstar\" Sirius, which appears at the vernal equinox \"at the end of the Pitriyana\". The \"Pitriyana\" (meaning \"the path of the fathers\", called Pitrs), are the six southern signs of the Zodiak, by Tilak also called \"the eternal waters of Yamaloka\". Illustrative Maitrayani Upanishad VI, 1 describes the year as divided into two halfes, one of which belongs to Agni (Fire) and the other to Varuna (Water). Thus according to Bal Gangadhar Tilak in 1893 the year started at the time of the \"Rigveda\" at the vernal equinox and the Ribhus recommenced working after their awakening in the beginning of the new year. William Dwight Whitney 1895 rejected this interpretation by Tilak. In this context Tilak also pointed to the fact that because of RV 1.161.13 not the solar year but the anticlockwise movement of the precession of the equinoxes must be meant which he calls an \"equinoctial year\", but he didn't refer to this in his further interpretation.\n\nBal Gangadhar Tilak then interpreted also in 1893 the Period of twelve days as the twelve intercalary days, to fix the difference between the lunar year of 354 days and the solar year of 366 days. While he interpreted the beginning of the year at the vernal equinox, Arthur Anthony Macdonell 1917 stated that the twelve intercalary days \"in all probability\" were inserted at the winter solstice. A.B. Keith 1925 also criticized Tilak's interpretation by pointing to \"... the fact that a year of 360 days and 12 months is ... the only year clearly known to the whole of Vedic literarure prior to the late Sutras\". Because he also \"admits that ancient Indians had knowledge of intercalation\" his statements on that point are considered \"confused\". But already 1895 a similar view in terms of the length of the year was stated by George Thibaut and W.D. Whitney in \"Indian Antiquity\". In 1960 Narendra Nath Law wrote in \"Indian Antiquity Quarterly\" that: \"W<hitney> would be correct if the 7th season or the 13th month (presumably for intercalation) had not been mentionend.\" He was referring to RV 1.164.15 which was interpreted by H.H. Wilson as describing seven seasons. But according to the translation of Ralph Thomas Hotchkin Griffith RV 1.164.15 means the seven Rishis, which according to David Frawley were actually eight seers, representing the Big Dipper. The eighth star of the big dipper is according to his later reference to RV 3.56.2 in connexion with RV 1.164.15 not the unseen fourth star of the handle forming a double star system but the Pole Star around which the big dipper rotates. Already Moritz Winternitz 1907 pointed \"to the fact that there are certain passages in the Vedic texts which admid of various interpretations.\" So A.B. Keith's and A.A. Macdonell's 1912 statement is still applicable, the 12 days were \"merely the 'reflexion of the year' (samvatsarasya pratima) in the same way that they represent the twelve months and have no relation to chronology at all.\"\n\nThe Ribhus are also known in regional scripts as ருபுக்கள்; ஆர்பவ:, ருபுகணங்கள் (ருபு, வாஜன், விப்வான்.\n\n"}
{"id": "100329", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=100329", "title": "Amrita", "text": "Amrita\n\nAmrita (, IAST: \"amṛta\"), Amrit or Amata (also called Sudha, Amiy, Ami) is a word that literally means \"immortality\" and is often referred to in ancient Indian texts as nectar. \"Amṛta\" is etymologically related to the Greek \"ambrosia\" and carries the same meaning. Its first occurrence is in the Rigveda, where it is considered one of several synonyms for \"soma\", the drink of the devas.\n\nAmrit has varying significance in different Indian religions. The word \"Amrit\" is also a common first name for Sikhs and Hindus, while its feminine form is \"Amritā\". The traditional masculine name is \"Amrith\" with the feminine name being \"Amritha\".\n\nThe amṛta is repeatedly referred to as the drink of the devas, which grants them immortality. Despite this, the nectar does not actually offer true immortality: instead, by partaking it, the devas were able to attain a higher level of knowledge and power, which they had lost due to the curse of Sage Durvasa.\n\nThe amṛta features in the samudra manthana legend, which describes how the devas, because of a curse from the sage Durvasa, begin to lose their immortality. Assisted by their rivals, the asuras, the devas begin to churn the ocean, releasing (among other extraordinary objects and beings) the amṛta.\n\nAmṛta is sometimes said to miraculously form on, or flow from, statues of Hindu gods. The substance is consumed by worshippers and is alleged to be sweet-tasting and not at all similar to honey or sugar water.\n\nAmṛta was the last of the fourteen treasures that emerged from the churning of the ocean and contained in a pot borne by Dhanvantari, the physician of the devas.\n\nAmrit () is the name of the holy water used in the baptism ceremony or Amrit Sanchar in Sikhism. This ceremony is observed to initiate the Sikhs into the Khalsa and requires drinking amrit. This is created by mixing a number of soluble ingredients, including sugar, and is then rolled with a khanda with the accompaniment of scriptural recitation of five sacred verses.\n\nMetaphorically, God's name is also referred to as a nectar:\n<poem>ਅੰਮ੍ਰਿਤ ਸਬਦੁ ਅੰਮ੍ਰਿਤ ਹਰਿ ਬਾਣੀ ॥ \nAmrit sabad amrit har baṇi.\nThe Shabda is Amrit; the Lord's \"bani\" is Amrit. \nਸਤਿਗੁਰਿ ਸੇਵਿਐ ਰਿਦੈ ਸਮਾਣੀ ॥ \nSatgur seviai ridai samāṇi.\nServing the True Guru, it permeates the heart. \nਨਾਨਕ ਅੰਮ੍ਰਿਤ ਨਾਮੁ ਸਦਾ ਸੁਖਦਾਤਾ ਪੀ ਅੰਮ੍ਰਿਤੁ ਸਭ ਭੁਖ ਲਹਿ ਜਾਵਣਿਆ\nNānak amrit nām sadā sukhdāta pi amrit sabh bhukh lėh jāvaṇia.\nO Nanak, the Ambrosial Naam is forever the Giver of peace; drinking in this Amrit, all hunger is satisfied.</poem>\n\nAccording to Thanissaro Bhikkhu, \"the deathless\" refers to the deathless dimension of the mind which is dwelled in permanently after nibbana.\n\nIn the Amata Sutta, the Buddha advises monks to stay with the four Satipatthana: \"Monks, remain with your minds well-established in these four establishings of mindfulness. Don't let the deathless be lost to you.\"\n\nIn the questions for Nagasena, King Milinda asks for evidence that the Buddha once lived, wherein Nagasena describes evidence of the Dhamma in a simile:\n\nAmṛta () also plays a significant role in Vajrayana Buddhism as a sacramental drink which is consumed at the beginning of all important rituals such as the abhisheka, ganachakra, and homa. In the Tibetan tradition, \"dütsi\" is made during drubchens - lengthy ceremonies involving many high lamas. It usually takes the form of small, dark-brown grains that are taken with water, or dissolved in very weak solutions of alcohol and is said to improve physical and spiritual well-being.\n\nThe foundational text of traditional Tibetan medicine, the Four Tantras, is also known by the name \"The Heart of Amrita\" ().\n\n\"The Immaculate Crystal Garland\" () describes the origin of amrita in a version of the samudra manthana legend retold in Buddhist terms. In this Vajrayana version, the monster Rahu steals the amrita and is blasted by Vajrapani's thunderbolt. As Rahu has already drunk the amrita he cannot die, but his blood, dripping onto the surface of this earth, causes all kinds of medicinal plants to grow. At the behest of all the Buddhas, Vajrapani reassembles Rahu who eventually becomes a protector of Buddhism according to the Nyingma school of Tibetan Buddhism.\n\n\"Inner Offering\" (, ) is the most symbolic Amrita offering assembly, and the \"Inner Offering Nectar Pill\" (, ) is a precious and secret medicine of Tibetan Buddhism, which are only used internally for higher ranking monks in Nyingma school. Its ingredients including Five Amrita and Five Meat, which represents five buddha, and five elements respectively. According to \"Tantras of Chakravarti\", and \"Tantras of Vajravārāhī\", a ceremony needs to be hold for melting and blessing the Inner Offering Nectar. Five Nectar needs to be arranged in four directions: yellow excrement in the east, green bone marrow in the north, white semen in the west and red blood in the south, blue urine is placed in the center. Four Nectar should come from wise monks and the ova should be collected from the first menstruation of a blessed woman. The Five Meats are arranged similarly, meat of black bull in the southeast, the meat of the blue dog in the southwest, the meast of the white elephant in the northwest, the meat of the green horse in the northeast, and the meat of a red human corpse in the center. After the ceremony, these ingredients will transform into an \"one taste\" (\"ekarasa\") elixir, which bestows bliss, vitality, immortality and wisdom. Actual modern practitioner will take a 'synthesized essence' of the Nectar Pill and combined it with black tea or alcohol, but mostly the \"Nectar Pill\" are derived from plants.\n\nChinese Buddhism describes Amrita () as blessed water, food, or other consumable objects often produced through merits of chanting mantras.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "100542", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=100542", "title": "Ātman (Hinduism)", "text": "Ātman (Hinduism)\n\nĀtman () is a Sanskrit word that means inner self or soul. In Hindu philosophy, especially in the Vedanta school of Hinduism, Ātman is the first principle, the \"true\" self of an individual beyond identification with phenomena, the essence of an individual. In order to attain liberation (moksha), a human being must acquire self-knowledge (atma jnana), which is to realize that one's true self (Ātman) is identical with the transcendent self Brahman.\n\nThe six orthodox schools of Hinduism believe that there is Ātman (soul, self) in every being. This is a major point of difference with the Buddhist doctrine of Anatta which holds that there is no unchanging soul or self.\n\n\"Ātman\" (Atma, आत्मा, आत्मन्) is a Sanskrit word which means \"essence, breath, soul.\" It is derived from the Proto-Indo-European word \"\" (a root meaning \"breath\" with only Germanic cognates: Dutch \"adem\", Old High German \"atum\" \"breath,\" Modern German \"atmen\" \"to breathe\" and \"Atem\" \"respiration, breath\", Old English \"eþian\").\n\nĀtman, sometimes spelled without a diacritic as \"atman\" in scholarly literature, means \"real self\" of the individual, \"innermost essence\", and soul. Atman, in Hinduism, is considered as eternal, imperishable, beyond time, \"not the same as body or mind or consciousness, but is something beyond which permeates all these\". Atman is a metaphysical and spiritual concept for the Hindus, often discussed in their scriptures with the concept of Brahman.\n\nThe earliest use of word \"Ātman\" in Indian texts is found in the Rig Veda (RV X.97.11). Yāska, the ancient Indian grammarian, commenting on this Rigvedic verse, accepts the following meanings of Ātman: the pervading principle, the organism in which other elements are united and the ultimate sentient principle.\n\nOther hymns of Rig Veda where the word Ātman appears include I.115.1, VII.87.2, VII.101.6, VIII.3.24, IX.2.10, IX.6.8, and X.168.4.\n\nĀtman is a central idea in all of the Upanishads, and \"know your Ātman\" is their thematic focus. These texts state that the core of every person's self is not the body, nor the mind, nor the ego, but \"Ātman\", which means \"soul\" or \"self\". Atman is the spiritual essence in all creatures, their real innermost essential being. It is eternal, it is the essence, it is ageless. Atman is that which one is at the deepest level of one's existence.\n\nThe \"Brihadaranyaka Upanishad\" describes Atman as that in which everything exists, which is of the highest value, which permeates everything, which is the essence of all, bliss and beyond description. In hymn 4.4.5, Brihadaranyaka Upanishad describes Atman as Brahman (universal absolute; supreme soul), and associates it with everything one is, everything one can be, one's free will, one's desire, what one does, what one doesn't do, the good in oneself, the bad in oneself.\nThis theme of Ātman, that is soul and self of oneself, every person, every being is the same as Brahman, is extensively repeated in Brihadāranyaka Upanishad. The Upanishad asserts that this knowledge of \"I am Brahman\", and that there is no difference between \"I\" and \"you\", or \"I\" and \"him\" is a source of liberation, and not even gods can prevail over such a liberated man. For example, in hymn 1.4.10,\n\nAlong with the \"Brihadāranyaka\", all the earliest and middle Upanishads discuss Ātman as they build their theories to answer how man can achieve liberation, freedom and bliss. The \"Katha Upanishad\", for example, explains Atman as immanent and transcendent innermost essence of each human being and living creature, that this is one, even though the external forms of living creatures manifest in different forms, for example, in hymns 2.2.9 and others, its states\n\nKatha Upanishad, in Book 1, hymns 3.3 to 3.4, describes the widely cited analogy of chariot for the relation of \"Soul, Self\" to body, mind and senses. Stephen Kaplan translates these hymns as, \"Know the Self as the rider in a chariot, and the body as simply the chariot. Know the intellect as the charioteer, and the mind as the reins. The senses, they say are the horses, and sense objects are the paths around them\". The Katha Upanishad then declares that \"when the Self [Ātman] understands this and is unified, integrated with body, senses and mind, is virtuous, mindful and pure, he reaches bliss, freedom and liberation\".\n\nThe \"Chandogya Upanishad\" explains Ātman as that which appears to be separate between two living beings but isn't, that essence and innermost, true, radiant self of all individuals which connects and unifies all. In hymn 4.10.1 through 4.10.3, for example, it explains it with example of rivers, some of which flow to the east and some to the west, but ultimately all merge into the ocean and become one. In the same way, the individual souls are pure being, states the \"Chandogya Upanishad\"; an individual soul is pure truth, and an individual soul is a manifestation of the ocean of one universal soul.\n\nĀtman is a key topic of the Upanishads, but they express two distinct, somewhat divergent themes. Some teach that Brahman (highest reality; universal principle; being-consciousness-bliss) is identical with Ātman, while others teach that Ātman is part of Brahman but not identical to it. This ancient debate flowered into various dual and non-dual theories in Hinduism. The Brahmasutra by Badarayana (~100 BCE) synthesized and unified these somewhat conflicting theories, stating that Atman and Brahman are different in some respects, particularly during the state of ignorance, but at the deepest level and in the state of self-realization, Atman and Brahman are identical, non-different (advaita). This synthesis overcame the dualistic tradition of Samkhya-Yoga schools and realism-driven traditions of Nyaya-Vaiseshika schools, enabling it to become the foundation of Vedanta as Hinduism's enduring spiritual tradition.\n\nAll major orthodox schools of Hinduism –Nyaya, Vaisesika, Samkhya, Yoga, Mimamsa, and Vedanta– accept the foundational premise of the Vedas and Upanishads that \"Ātman exists\". Jainism too accepts this premise, though it has its own idea of what that means. In contrast, both Buddhism and the Charvakas deny that there is anything called \"Ātman/soul/self\".\n\nKnowing Ātman, also referred to as self-knowledge, is one of the defining themes of all major orthodox schools of Hinduism, but they diverge on how. In Hinduism, self-knowledge is the knowledge and understanding of Atman, what it is, and what it is not. Hinduism considers Atman as distinct from the ever-evolving individual personality characterized with \"Ahamkara\" (ego, non-spiritual psychological I-ness Me-ness), habits, prejudices, desires, impulses, delusions, fads, behaviors, pleasures, sufferings and fears. Human personality and \"Ahamkara\" shift, evolve or change with time, state the schools of Hinduism; while, Atman doesn't. Atman, state these schools, is the unchanging, eternal, innermost radiant self that is unaffected by personality, unaffected by ego of oneself, unaffected by ego of others; Atman is that which is ever-free, never-bound, one that seeks, realizes and is the realized purpose, meaning, liberation in life. Puchalski states, \"the ultimate goal of Hindu religious life is to transcend individually, to realize one's own true nature\", the inner essence of oneself, which is divine and pure.\n\nPhilosophical schools such as Advaita (non-dualism) see the \"spirit/soul/self\" within each living entity as being fully identical with Brahman– the universal soul. The Advaita school believes that there is one soul that connects and exists in all living beings, regardless of their shapes or forms, and there is no distinction, no superior, no inferior, no separate devotee soul (Atman), no separate god soul (Brahman). The oneness unifies all beings, there is divine in every being, and that all existence is a single reality, state the Advaita Vedanta Hindus. In contrast, devotional sub-schools of Vedanta such as Dvaita (dualism) differentiate between the individual Atma in living beings, and the supreme Atma (Paramatma) as being separate.\n\nAdvaita Vedanta philosophy considers Atman as self-existent awareness, limitless and non-dual. To Advaitins, the Atman is the Brahman, the Brahman is the Atman, each self is non-different from the infinite. Atman is the universal principle, one eternal undifferentiated self-luminous consciousness, the truth asserts Advaita Hinduism. Human beings, in a state of unawareness of this universal self, see their \"I-ness\" as different than the being in others, then act out of impulse, fears, cravings, malice, division, confusion, anxiety, passions, and a sense of distinctiveness. To Advaitins, Atman-knowledge is the state of full awareness, liberation, and freedom that overcomes dualities at all levels, realizing the divine within oneself, the divine in others, and in all living beings; the non-dual oneness, that God is in everything, and everything is God. This identification of individual living beings/souls, or jiva-atmas, with the 'one Atman' is the non-dualistic Advaita Vedanta position.\n\nThe monist, non-dual conception of existence in Advaita Vedanta is not accepted by the dualistic/theistic Dvaita Vedanta. Dvaita Vedanta calls the Atman of a supreme being as \"\"Paramatman\"\", and holds it to be different from individual Atman. Dvaita scholars assert that God is the ultimate, complete, perfect, but distinct soul, one that is separate from incomplete, imperfect \"jivas\" (individual souls). The Advaita sub-school believes that self-knowledge leads to liberation in this life, while the Dvaita sub-school believes that liberation is only possible in after-life as communion with God, and only through the grace of God (if not, then one's Atman is reborn). God created individual souls, state Dvaita Vedantins, but the individual soul never was and never will become one with God; the best it can do is to experience bliss by getting infinitely close to God. The Dvaita school, therefore, in contrast to monistic position of Advaita, advocates a version of monotheism wherein Brahman is made synonymous with Vishnu (or Narayana), distinct from numerous individual Atmans. Dvaita school, states Graham Oppy, is not strict monotheism, as it does not deny existence of other gods and their respective Atman.\n\nThe Vedanta sub-schools of Vishishtadvaita Vedanta and Achintya Bheda Abheda combine ideas about Ātman from dual and non-dual schools.\n\nĀtman, in the ritualism-based Mīmāṃsā school of Hinduism, is an eternal, omnipresent, inherently active essence that is identified as I-consciousness. Unlike all other schools of Hinduism, Mimamsaka scholars considered ego and Atman as the same. Within Mimamsa school, there was divergence of beliefs. Kumārila, for example, believed that Atman is the object of I-consciousness, whereas Prabhakara believed that Atman is the subject of I-consciousness. Mimamsaka Hindus believed that what matters is virtuous actions and rituals completed with perfection, and it is this that creates merit and imprints knowledge on Atman, whether one is aware or not aware of Atman. Their foremost emphasis was formulation and understanding of laws/duties/virtuous life (dharma) and consequent perfect execution of \"kriyas\" (actions). The Upanishadic discussion of Atman, to them, was of secondary importance. While other schools disagreed and discarded the Atma theory of Mimamsa, they incorporated Mimamsa theories on ethics, self-discipline, action, and dharma as necessary in one's journey toward knowing one's Atman.\n\nThe Vaisheshika school of Hinduism, using its non-theistic theories of atomistic naturalism, posits that Ātman is one of the four eternal non-physical substances without attributes, the other three being \"kala\" (time), \"dik\" (space) and \"manas\" (mind). Time and space, stated Vaiśeṣika scholars, are \"eka\" (one), \"nitya\" (eternal) and \"vibhu\" (all pervading). Time and space are indivisible reality, but human mind prefers to divide them to comprehend past, present, future, relative place of other substances and beings, direction and its own coordinates in the universe. In contrast to these characteristics of time and space, Vaiśeṣika scholars considered Ātman to be many, eternal, independent and spiritual substances that cannot be reduced or inferred from other three non-physical and five physical \"dravya\" (substances). Mind and sensory organs are instruments, while consciousness is the domain of \"atman, soul, self\".\n\nThe knowledge of Ātman, to Vaiśeṣika Hindus, is another knowledge without any \"bliss\" or \"consciousness\" moksha state that Vedanta and Yoga school describe.\n\nEarly atheistic Nyaya scholars, and later theistic Nyaya scholars, both made substantial contributions to the systematic study of Ātman. They posited that even though \"self/soul\" is intimately related to the knower, it can still be the subject of knowledge. John Plott states that the Nyaya scholars developed a theory of negation that far exceeds Hegel's theory of negation, while their epistemological theories refined to \"know the knower\" at least equals Aristotle's sophistication. Nyaya methodology influenced all major schools of Hinduism.\n\nThe Nyaya scholars defined Ātman as an imperceptible substance that is the substrate of human consciousness, manifesting itself with or without qualities such as desires, feelings, perception, knowledge, understanding, errors, insights, sufferings, bliss, and others. Nyaya school not only developed its theory of Atman, it contributed to Hindu philosophy in a number of ways. To the Hindu theory of Ātman, the contributions of Nyaya scholars were twofold. One, they went beyond holding it as \"self evident\" and offered rational proofs, consistent with their epistemology, in their debates with Buddhists, that \"Atman exists\". Second, they developed theories on what \"Atman is and is not\". As proofs for the proposition \"self/soul exists\", for example, Nyaya scholars argued that personal recollections and memories of the form \"I did this so many years ago\" implicitly presume that there is a self that is substantial, continuing, unchanged, and existent.\n\nNyayasutra, a 2nd-century CE foundational text of Nyaya school of Hinduism, states that the soul is a proper object of human knowledge. It also states that soul is a real substance that can be inferred from certain signs, objectively perceivable attributes. For example, in book 1, chapter 1, verses 9 and 10, Nyayasutra states\n\nIn book 2, chapter 1, verses 1 to 23, Nyayasutras text posits that the sensory act of looking is different than perception and cognition, that perception and knowledge arise from the seekings and actions of Ātman (soul). Naiyayikas emphasize that Ātman has qualities, but is different than its qualities. For example, desire is one of many quality of Ātman in Nyaya school, but they state that Ātman need not always have desire, and in the state of liberation, for instance, Atman is without desire. Atman is the object, and the conventional \"I, me\" is one of its subjects, to Nyaya school.\n\nThe concept of Ātman in Samkhya, the oldest school of Hinduism, is quite similar to one in Advaita Vedanta school. Both Samkhya and Advaita consider the ego (asmita, ahamkara) rather than the Ātman to be the cause of pleasure and pain. They both consider Ātman as self, soul that is innermost essence of any individual being. Further, they both consider self-knowledge as the means of liberation, freedom and bliss. The difference between Samkhya and Advaita is that Samkhya holds there are as many \"Atmans\" as there are beings, each distinct reality unto itself, and self-knowledge a state of Ipseity. In contrast, the monism theme of Advaita holds that there is one soul, and that the self of all beings are connected and unified with Brahman. The essence and spirit of everything is related to each self, asserts Advaita Vedanta, and each Atman is related to the essence and spirit of everything; all is one; self is Brahman and Brahman is self. Samkhya asserts that each being's Atman is unique and different.\n\nThe Yogasutra of Patanjali, the foundational text of Yoga school of Hinduism, mentions \"Atma\" in multiple verses, and particularly in its last book, where Samadhi is described as the path to self-knowledge and kaivalya. Some earlier mentions of Atman in Yogasutra include verse 2.5, where evidence of ignorance includes \"confusing what is not Atman as Atman\".\n\nIn verses 2.19-2.20, Yogasutra declares that pure ideas are the domain of the soul, the perceivable universe exists to enlighten the soul, but while the soul is pure, it may be deceived by complexities of perception or its intellect. These verses also set the purpose of all experience as a means to self-knowledge.\n\nIn Book 4, Yogasutra states spiritual liberation as the stage where the yogin achieves distinguishing self-knowledge, he no longer confuses his mind as his soul, the mind is no longer affected by afflictions or worries of any kind, ignorance vanishes, and \"pure consciousness settles in its own pure nature\".\n\nThe Yoga school is similar to the Samkhya school in its conceptual foundations of Ātman. It is the self that is discovered and realized in the Kaivalya state, in both schools. Like Samkhya, this is not a single universal Ātman. It is one of the many individual selves where each \"pure consciousness settles in its own pure nature\", as a unique distinct soul/self. However, Yoga school's methodology was widely influential on other schools of Hindu philosophy. Vedanta monism, for example, adopted Yoga as a means to reach \"Jivanmukti\" – self-realization in this life – as conceptualized in Advaita Vedanta.\n\nThe Atman theory in Upanishads had a profound impact on ancient ethical theories and dharma traditions now known as Hinduism. The earliest Dharmasutras of Hindus recite Atman theory from the Vedic texts and Upanishads, and on its foundation build precepts of dharma, laws and ethics. Atman theory, particularly the Advaita Vedanta and Yoga versions, influenced the emergence of the theory of Ahimsa (non-violence against all creatures), culture of vegetarianism, and other theories of ethical, dharmic life.\n\nThe Dharmasutras and Dharmasastras integrate the teachings of Atman theory. Apastamba Dharmasutra, the oldest known Indian text on dharma, for example, titles Chapters 1.8.22 and 1.8.23 as \"Knowledge of the Atman\" and then recites,\n\nThe ethical prohibition against harming any human beings or other living creatures (Ahimsa, अहिंसा), in Hindu traditions, can be traced to the Atman theory. This precept against injuring any living being appears together with Atman theory in hymn 8.15.1 of Chandogya Upanishad (ca. 8th century BCE), then becomes central in the texts of Hindu philosophy, entering the dharma codes of ancient \"Dharmasutras\" and later era \"Manu-Smriti\". Ahimsa theory is a natural corollary and consequence of \"Atman is universal oneness, present in all living beings. Atman connects and prevades in everyone. Hurting or injuring another being is hurting the Atman, and thus one's self that exists in another body\". This conceptual connection between one's Atman, the universal, and Ahimsa starts in Isha Upanishad, develops in the theories of the ancient scholar Yajnavalkya, and one which inspired Gandhi as he led non-violent movement against colonialism in early 20th century.\n\nAll orthodox schools of Hinduism hold the premise, \"Atman exists, as self evident truth\". Buddhism, in contrast, holds the premise, \"Atman does not exist (or, An-atman) as self evident\".\n\nBuddhists do not believe that at the core of all human beings and living creatures, there is any \"eternal, essential and absolute something called a soul, self or atman\". Buddhists reject the concept and all doctrines associated with atman, call atman as illusion (\"maya\"), asserting instead the theory of \"no-self\" and \"no-soul\". Buddhism, from its earliest days, has denied the existence of the \"self, soul\" in its core philosophical and ontological texts. In its soteriological themes, Buddhism has defined nirvana as that blissful state when a person realizes that he or she has \"no self, no soul\".\n\nHindus believe in Atman. They hold that at the core of all human beings and living creatures, there is \"eternal, innermost essential and absolute something called a soul, self that is atman.\" Within the diverse schools of Hinduism, there are differences of opinion on whether souls are distinct, whether a supreme soul or god exists, whether the nature of Atman is dual or non-dual, how to reach moksha– the knowledge of self that liberates one to blissful content state of existence, and whether moksha is achievable in this life (Advaita Vedanta, Yoga) or is achievable only in after-life (Dvaita Vedanta, Nyaya). However, despite these diversity of ideas and paths in different schools of Hinduism, unlike Buddhism, the foundation premise of Hinduism is that \"soul/self exists\", and there is bliss in seeking self, knowing self, and self-realization.\n\nBuddhist texts chronologically placed in the 1st millennium of common era, such as the Mahayana tradition's \"Tathāgatagarbha sūtras\" suggest self-like concepts, variously called \"Tathagatagarbha\" or \"Buddha nature\". These have been controversial idea in Buddhism, and \"eternal self\" concepts have been generally rejected. In modern era studies, scholars such as Wayman and Wayman state that these \"self-like\" concepts are neither self nor sentient being, nor soul, nor personality. Some scholars posit that the \"Tathagatagarbha Sutras\" were written to promote Buddhism to non-Buddhists.\n\nIn Theravada tradition, the Dhammakaya Movement in Thailand teaches that it is erroneous to subsume nirvana under the rubric of \"anatta\" (non-self); instead, nirvana is taught to be the \"true self\" or \"dhammakaya\". Similar interpretations have been put forth by the then Thai Sangharaja in 1939. According to Williams, the Sangharaja's interpretation echoes the \"tathāgatagarbha\" sutras. The Dhammakaya Movement teaching that nirvana is atta (atman) in 1999, has been criticized as heretical in Buddhism by Ven. Payutto, a well-known scholar monk, who added that 'Buddha taught nibbana as being non-self\". This dispute on the nature of teachings about 'self' and 'non-self' in Buddhism has led to arrest warrants, attacks and threats.\n\nAccording to Johannes Bronkhorst, a professor of Indology specializing in early Buddhism and Hinduism, while there may be ambivalence on the existence or non-existence of self in early Buddhist literature, it is clear from these texts that seeking self-knowledge is not the Buddhist path for liberation, and turning away from self-knowledge is.\n\nThe Atman concept and its discussions in Hindu philosophy, parallel with \"psuchê\" (soul) and its discussion in ancient Greek philosophy. Eliade notes that there is a capital difference, with schools of Hinduism asserting that liberation of Atman implies \"self-knowledge\" and \"bliss\". Similarly, self-knowledge conceptual theme of Hinduism (\"Atman jnana\") parallels the \"know thyself\" conceptual theme of Greek philosophy. Max Müller summarized it thus,\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "100594", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=100594", "title": "Naraka", "text": "Naraka\n\nNaraka (, literally \"of man\") is the Sanskrit word for the realm of hell in Dharmic traditions. According to some schools of Hinduism, Sikhism, Jainism and Buddhism, Naraka is a place of torment. The word 'Neraka' (modification of Naraka) in Indonesian and Malaysian has also been used to describe the Islamic concept of Hell.\n\nAlternatively, the \"hellish beings\" that are said to reside in this underworld are often referred to as \"Narakas\". These beings are also termed in Hindi as Narakis (, '), Narakarnavas (, ') and Narakavasis (, \"\").\n\n\"Naraka\" in Vedas, is a place where souls are sent for the expiation of their sins. It is mentioned especially in dharmaśāstras, itihāsas and s but also in Vedic samhitas, Aranyakas and . Some Upanisads speak of 'darkness' instead of hell. A summary of , Bhagavad Gita, mentions hell several times. Even Adi Sankara mentions it in his commentary on Vedanta sutra.\nStill, some people like members of Arya Samaj don't accept the existence of Naraka or consider it metaphorical.\n\nIn Puranas like Bhagavata Purana, Garuda Purana and Vishnu Purana there are elaborate descriptions of many hells. They are situated above the Garbhodaka ocean.\n\nYama, Lord of Justice, judges living beings after death and assigns appropriate punishments. Nitya-samsarins (forever transmigrating ones) can experience Naraka for expiation. After the period of punishment is complete, they are reborn on earth in human or animal bodies. Therefore, neither naraka nor svarga are permanent abodes.\n\n\"Yama Loka\" is the abode of Lord Yama. Yama is \"Dharmaraja\" or Dharma king; Yama Loka is a temporary \"purgatorium\" for sinners (papi). According to Hindu scriptures, Yama's divine assistant Lord Chitragupta maintains a record of the individual deeds of every living being in the world, and based on the complete audit of his deeds, dispatches the soul of the deceased either to Svarga (Heaven) or to the various Narakas according to the nature of their sins. The scriptures describe that even people who have done a majority of good deeds could come to Yama Loka for redemption from the small sins they have committed, and once the punishments have been served for those sins they could be sent for rebirth to earth or to heaven. In the epic of Mahabharata, even the Pandavas (who represent righteousness and virtuousness) spent a brief time in hell for their small sins.\n\nAt the time of death, sinful souls are vulnerable for capture by Yamadutas, servants of Yama (who comes personally only in special cases). Yama ordered his servants to leave Vaishnavas alone. Sri Vaishnavas are taken by Vishnudutas to Vaikuntha and Gaudiya Vaishnavas to Goloka.\n\nIn Buddhism, Naraka refers to the worlds of greatest suffering. Buddhist texts describe a vast array of tortures and realms of torment in Naraka; an example is the \"Devadūta-sutta\" from the Pāli Canon. The descriptions vary from text to text and are not always consistent with each other. Though the term is often translated as \"hell\", unlike the Abrahamic hells, Naraka is not eternal, though when a timescale is given, it is suggested to be extraordinarily long. In this sense, it is similar to purgatory, but unlike both Abrahamic hell and purgatory, there is no divine force involved in determining a being's entry and exit to and from the realm and no soul is involved. Rather, the being is brought here—as is the case with all the other realms in the Buddhist cosmology—by natural law: the law of karma, and they remain until the negative karma that brought them there has been used up.\n\nIn Jainism, Naraka is the name given to realm of existence in Jain cosmology having great suffering. The length of a being's stay in a Naraka is not eternal, though it is usually very long—measured in billions of years. A soul is born into a Naraka as a direct result of his or her previous karma (actions of body, speech and mind), and resides there for a finite length of time until his karma has achieved its full result. After his karma is used up, he may be reborn in one of the higher worlds as the result of an earlier karma that had not yet ripened. Jain texts mention that these hells are situated in the seven grounds at the lower part of the universe. The seven grounds are:\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "100710", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=100710", "title": "Chocolate bar", "text": "Chocolate bar\n\nA chocolate bar is a chocolate confection in an oblong or rectangular form, which distinguishes it from bulk dark chocolate produced for commercial use or individually portioned chocolates such as pastilles, bonbons and truffles. In most of the English-speaking world, \"chocolate bar\" also refers to a typically snack-sized bar coated with or substantially consisting of chocolate but containing other ingredients. The first solid chocolate bar was produced by Fry's of Bristol, England in 1847, which was then mass-produced as Fry's Chocolate Cream in 1866.\n\nA chocolate bar made exclusively from chocolate contains some or all of the following components: cocoa solids, cocoa butter, sugar, and milk. The relative presence or absence of these define the subclasses of chocolate bar made of dark chocolate, milk chocolate, and white chocolate. In addition to these main ingredients a chocolate bar may contain flavorings such as vanilla and emulsifiers such as soy lecithin to alter its consistency. While vanilla is the most common flavouring, many other flavours are available, including mint, orange, and coffee.\n\nChocolate bars containing other ingredients feature a wide variety of layerings or mixtures that include nuts, fruit, caramel, nougat, and fondant. A popular example is a Snickers bar, which consists of a nougat mixed with caramel and peanuts. Chocolate bars are often loosely called candy bars in American English, a term that encompasses similar treats produced without chocolate, such as the Zagnut and Bit-o-Honey bars. A wide selection of similar chocolate treats are produced with added sources of protein and vitamins. These include energy bars, protein bars and granola bars sold as snacks or nutritional supplements.\n\nUp to and including the 19th century, confectionery of all sorts was typically sold in small pieces to be bagged and bought by weight. The introduction of chocolate as something that could be eaten as is, rather than used to make beverages or desserts, resulted in the earliest bar forms, or tablets. At some point, \"chocolates\" came to mean any chocolate-covered sweets, whether nuts, creams (fondant), caramel candies, or others. The chocolate bar evolved from all of these in the late-19th century as a way of packaging and selling candy more conveniently for both buyer and seller; however, the buyer had to pay for the packaging. It was considerably cheaper to buy candy loose, or in bulk.\n\nThe production of chocolate specifically meant to be eaten in bars may predate the French Revolution. The Marquis de Sade wrote to his wife in a letter dated May 16, 1779, complaining about the quality of a care package he had received while in prison. Among the requests that he made for future deliveries were for cookies that \"must smell of chocolate, as if one were biting into a chocolate bar.\" This phrasing is highly suggestive of chocolate bars being eaten by themselves and not just grated into chocolate-based drinks, as was a far more common use at this time. Such a product would predate the invention of the cocoa press by Coenraad Johannes van Houten and other innovations which made chocolate suitable for mass-production.\nIn 1847, Joseph Fry discovered a way to mix the ingredients of cocoa powder, sugar and cocoa to manufacture a paste that could then be molded into a chocolate bar proper for consumption. Subsequently, his chocolate factory, Fry's of Bristol, England, began mass-producing chocolate bars and they became very popular. The firm began producing the Fry's Chocolate Cream bar in 1866. Inspired by Fry, John Cadbury, founder of Cadbury, introduced his brand of the chocolate bar in 1849. That same year, Fry and Cadbury chocolate bars were displayed publicly at a trade fair in Bingley Hall, Birmingham. Over 220 Fry's products were introduced in the following decades, including production of the first chocolate Easter egg in the UK in 1873 and Fry's Turkish Delight (or Fry's Turkish bar) in 1914.\n\nAlthough chocolate bars had their beginnings in the mid 19th century, their sales grew most rapidly in the early-20th century. Milk chocolate was invented in Switzerland by Daniel Peter and Henri Nestlé in 1875. In 1897, following the lead of Swiss companies, Cadbury introduced its own line of milk chocolate bars, with Cadbury Dairy Milk, produced in 1905, becoming the company's best selling bar. In North America, Ganong Bros., Ltd. of St. Stephen, New Brunswick, Canada developed and began selling their version of the modern chocolate bar in 1910. The Hershey Chocolate Company took the lead in the U.S.\n\nThe world's largest \"chocolate bar\" was produced as a stunt by Thorntons plc (UK) on 7 October 2011. It weighed and measured 4m by 4m by 0.35m. Some of the oldest preserved chocolate bars are two pieces of white and dark chocolate made between 1764 and 1795 for the king of Poland, Stanislaus Augustus Poniatowski, as a gift for his courtiers. Each bar, possibly made by the royal confectioner in Warsaw, bears the King's monogram, \"SAR\", and is on display in his summer residence, Palace on the Water, in Warsaw.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "101151", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=101151", "title": "Hors d'oeuvre", "text": "Hors d'oeuvre\n\nIn European cuisine an hors d'oeuvre (; ), appetizer or starter is a small dish served before a meal. Some \"hors d'oeuvres\" are served cold, others hot. \"Hors d'oeuvres\" may be served at the dinner table as a part of the meal, or they may be served before seating. Formerly, \"hors d'oeuvres\" were also served between courses.\n\nTypically smaller than a main dish, it is often designed to be eaten by hand (with minimal use of cutlery).\n\"Hors-d'œuvre\" in French literally means \"outside the work\" — that is, \"not part of the ordinary set of courses in a meal\" or perhaps more accurately a dish which is appendant to or supportive of the main course. The French spelling is the same for singular and plural usage; in English, the typographic ligature is usually replaced by the digraph , with the plural commonly written \"hors d'oeuvres\" and pronounced .\n\nThe \"hors d'oeuvre\" is also known as the starter or \"entrée\".\n\nA small number of food historians believe that the tradition may have begun in Russia, where small snacks of fish, caviar and meats were common after long travels. However, it may be that the custom originated in China, possibly coming through Steppes, into Russia, Scandinavia, France and other European countries. The tradition may have reached Italy, Greece and the Balkan nations through Russia or Persia. Many national customs are related, including the Swedish smörgåsbord, Russian zakuska, Lebanese mezze, and Italian antipasto. During the Roman Period the meal practice was to have two main courses which were supplemented before the meal with small amounts of fish, vegetables, cheeses, olives and even stuffed dormice. These would be served at the start of the meal known as either \"gustatio\" or \"promulsis\". The Greeks called the appetizer course \"propoma\".\n\nDuring the Middle Ages formal French meals were served with entremets between the serving of plates. These secondary dishes could be either actual food dishes, or elaborate displays and even dramatic or musical presentations. In the 14th century, recipes for entremets were mostly made with meat, fish, pork and vegetables. By the 15th century the elaborate display and performances were served up between courses, and could be edible or displays of subjects relevant to the host, created in butter sculpture or other types of crafted work. With the introduction in the 17th century of \"service à la française\", where all the dishes are laid out at once in very rigid symmetrical fashion, entremets began to change in meaning but were still mainly savoury. Along with this came elaborate silver and ceramic table displays as well as pièces montées. The entremets were placed between the other dishes within the main work of the meal.\n\nAt about this time in the 17th century, smaller dishes began to be served by being placed outside the main work of symmetrically placed dishes. These were known as \"hors d'oeuvre\". Hors d'oeuvres were originally served as a canapé of small toasted bread with a savoury topping before a meal. The first mention of the food item was by François Massialot in 1691, mentioned in his book: \"Le cuisinier roial et bourgeois\" (The Royal and Bourgeois Cook) and explained as \"\"Certain dishes served in addition to those one might expect in the normal composition of the feast\"\". In the French publication \"Les plaisirs de la table\", Edouard Nignon stated that hors d'oeuvres originated in Asia. He went on to state that the French considered hors-d'oeuvres to be superfluous to a well cooked meal. \"Service à la française\" continued in Europe until the early 19th century. After the 19th century the entremet would become almost exclusively a sweet dish or dessert with the British custom of the \"savoury\" being the only remaining tradition of the savoury entremet.\n\nThe style of formal dining changed drastically in the 19th century, becoming successive courses served one after the other over a period of time. Some traditional hors d'oeuvres would remain on the table throughout the meal. These included olives, nuts, celery and radishes. The changing, contemporary hors d'oeuvres, sometimes called \"\"dainty dishes\"\" became more complicated in preparation. Pastries, with meat and cream sauces among other elaborate items, had become a course served after the soup.\n\nFood in England is heavily influenced by other countries due to the island nation's dependence on importing outside goods and sometimes, inspiration. Many English culinary words and customs have been directly borrowed from the original French (some completely Anglicized in spelling) such as: \"cuisine\", \"sirloin\", \"pastry\" and \"omelette\" which came from the 18th century and earlier. In the late 19th and early 20th century, even more words, foods and customs from culinary France made their way into England, such as \"éclair\", \"casserole\", \"à la carte\", \"rôtisserie\" and \"hors d'oeuvre\".\n\nThe custom of the savoury course is of British origin and comes towards the end of the meal, before dessert or sweets or even after the dessert, in contrast to the hors d'oeuvre, which is served before the meal. The British favored the savoury course as a palate cleanser before drinking after the meal, which made the hors d'oeuvre before the meal unnecessary. The savoury is generally small, well spiced and often served hot, requiring cooking just before serving. In the Victorian and Edwardian periods, savouries included such toppings as fried oysters wrapped in bacon, and Scotch woodcock, which was a savoury made of scrambled eggs, ground black pepper and Gentleman's Relish on buttered toast, served hot. In France, cheese was often part of the savoury course or added with simple fruit as a dessert. A typical Edwardian dinner might consist of up to four courses that include two soups, two types of fish, two meats, ending with several savouries then sweets.\n\nThe term \"appetizer\" is a synonym for \"hors d'oeuvre\". It was first used in the United States and England simultaneously in 1860. Americans also use the term to define the first of three courses in a meal, which were optional and generally set on the table before guests were seated. Drinks before dinner became a custom towards the end of the 19th century. As this new fashion caught on, the British took inspiration from the French to begin serving hors d'oeuvres before dinner. A cocktail party is considered a small gathering with mixed drinks and light snacks. Hors d'oeuvres may be served as the only food offering at cocktail parties and receptions, where no dinner is served afterward. After the end of prohibition in the United States, the cocktail party gained acceptance. Prior to the First World War, American dinner guests would be expected to enter the dining room immediately where drinks would be served at the table with appetizers. This changed by the 1920s, when hors d'oeuvres were served prior to a non-alcoholic cocktail; however, after the repeal of Prohibition in the United States, cocktail parties became popular with many different hors d'oeuvres meant as something to help counter the stronger drinks. It is the cocktail party that helped transfer the hors d'oeuvres from the formal dining table to the mobility of the serving tray. These appetizers passed around the cocktail party may also be referred to as canapés.\n\nIn restaurants or large estates, hors d'oeuvres are prepared in a garde manger which is a cool room. Hors d'oeuvres are often prepared in advance. Some types may be refrigerated or frozen and then precooked and then reheated in an oven or microwave oven as necessary before serving.\n\nIf there is an extended period between when guests arrive and when the meal is eaten, for example during a cocktail hour, these might serve the purpose of sustaining guests during the wait, in the same way that apéritifs are served as a drink before meals.\n\nIt is also an unwritten rule that the dishes served as hors d'oeuvres do not give any clue to the main meal. They are served with the main meal menu in view either in hot, room temperature or cold forms; when served hot they are brought out after all the guests arrive so that everyone gets to taste the dishes.\n\nHors d'oeuvres before a meal may be rotated by waiters or passed. Stationary hors d'oeuvres served at the table on a tray may be referred to as table hors d'oeuvres or as buffet-style. Passed hors d'oeuvres provided by servers are part of butler-style service. or butlered hors d'oeuvres.\n\nThough any food served before the main course is technically an hors d'oeuvre, the phrase is generally limited to individual items, such as cheese or fruit. A glazed fig topped with mascarpone and wrapped with prosciutto is an hors d'oeuvre, and plain figs served on a platter may also be served as hors d'oeuvres. It could be pickled beets or anchovy eggs as topping over tomatoes as part of the initial \"drinks\" session such as of alcoholic or non alcoholic beverages. They are also served in the forms of dips, spreads, pastries, olives or nuts with or without a base of egg, cheese, meats, vegetables, seafood or breads. Single cold items served are smoked salmon, avocado pear, caviar, pâté, shellfish cocktails and melon with garnishes and decorations. Seasoned hot dishes served are of vegetables, meat, fish, egg, pasta, cheese, soufflés, tartlets, puff pastry or choux pastry.\n\n\nIn Mexico\" botanas\" refers to the vegetarian varieties commonly served in small portions in wine bars. In many Central American countries, hors d'oeuvres are known as \"bocas\" (lit. \"mouthfuls\"). \"Pasapalos\" (lit. \"drink passer\") is Venezuelan for an hors d'oeuvre.\n\nIn Arabic \"moqabbelat\" (, \"things which make one accept what is to come\". From root lit. \"to accept\") is the term for an hors d'oeuvre. In India it is known as chaat which is served throughout the day. Dahi puri is another snack from India which is especially popular from the city of Mumbai in the state of Maharashtra. Chaat is the snack food consumed separately and not part of main course meals. or zenzai is Japanese for an hors d'oeuvre; more commonly, , which is a direct transcription of \"hors d'oeuvre\", is used. In Korea, banchan () is a small serving of vegetables, cereals or meats. Additional Korean terms for hors d'oeuvres include \"jeonchae\" (), meaning \"before dish\" or \"epita-ijeo\" (), meaning \"appetizer\". In Vietnamese \"\" (\"cold plate first course\") is the name for an hors d'oeuvre. In Mandarin, \"lěng pán\" (\"cold plate\") or \"qián cài\" (\"before dish\") are terms used for hors d'oeuvres, which are served in steamer baskets or on small plates. \"Meze\" is a selection of small dishes served in Mediterranean cuisine, Middle Eastern cuisine, and Balkan cuisine. \"Mezedakia\" is a term for small mezes. \"Pembuka\" (lit. \"opening\") is Indonesian for an hors d'oeuvre. \"Yemekaltı\" is Turkish for an hors d'oeuvre. \"Zakuskis\" are hors d'oeuvres in Russian cuisine and other post-Soviet cuisines, served in the form of a buffet of cured meats and fishes. Caviar served in Iran and Russia is the traditional roe from wild sturgeon in the Caspian and Black Seas. \n\nIn England, devils on horseback is a hot hors d'oeuvre in different recipes, but in general they are a variation on angels on horseback, made by replacing oysters with dried fruit. The majority of recipes contain a pitted date (though prunes are sometimes used). \"Starters\" is the colloquial term for hors d'oeuvres in the UK, Ireland and India. Crudités from France are a blend of salads of raw vegetables and the serving has a minimum of three vegetables of striking colors. In Italian \"antipasto\" means it is served cold in the form of olive, cheese, pickled vegetables or \"entrada\" (Portuguese, Spanish) are served as hors d'oeuvres in Southern Europe. \"Voorgerecht\" in Dutch means the dish (\"gerecht\") before (\"voor\") the main course. Fattoush is a bread salad in Levantine cuisine made from toasted or fried pieces of pita bread (\"khubz 'arabi\") combined with mixed greens and other vegetables. It belongs to the family of dishes known as \"fattat\" (plural) or fatta, which use stale flatbread as a base.\n\nIn the United States the custom appears to have come from California, where a foreign saloon owner may have put out trays of simple hors d'oeuvres to serve his customers. This tradition soon became the 5-cent beer and free lunch in early America before prohibition ended the custom.\n\nIn the U.S., \"appetizers\", referring to anything served before a meal, is the most common term for hors d'oeuvres. Light snacks served outside of the context of a meal are called hors d'oeuvres (with the English-language pluralization).\n\nIn the Hawaiian language hors d'oeuvres and appetizers are called \"\". Hawaiian culinary influences are very diverse due to the multiple ethnicities living in the islands. This diversity, along with the Americanization of entertaining in the mid 20th century led to the Hawaiian Cocktail and the \"pūpū\" (hors-d'oeuvre) served at the beginning of luaus. This invention of a faux Polynesian experience is heavily influenced by Don the Beachcomber, who is credited for the creation of the \"pūpū\" platter and the drink named the \"Zombie\" for his Hollywood restaurant. At Don's the food was traditional Cantonese cuisine served with a fancy presentation. The first \"pūpū\" platters were eggrolls, chicken wings, spare ribs as well as other Chinese-American foods. Eventually Trader Vic would create the Mai Tai in his restaurants in the San Francisco Bay Area and the Tiki bar would become an American cocktail tradition.\n\nHors d'oeuvres, also called amuse-bouches, served around bars in Australia are oysters and alsace foie gras. Appetizers in New Zealand are lamb skewer or blue cod sliders. In New Zealand the Māori call their snacks \"Kai Timotimo\". Kiribati appetizers served include pastes made from chickpeas and eggplant, meat dishes with spices and wheat. Samoan foil chicken and roast pork, tidbits of meat in a smoky, spicy sauce are appetizers in Samoa. In Tonga, puu-puus or appetizers served are Waikiki shrimp and grilled pineapple with dipping sauce.\n\nIn Algeria, apart from fish, a dozen different hors d'oeuvres served include artichokes à la grecque, Algerian salad, salami sausage and prawns. Appetizers served in Kenya are raw and fresh vegetables and assorted dips with decorations. Before modern-day hors d'oeuvre were introduced from Europe into South Africa, starters served consisted of eastern fish sambals and cooked bone marrow served with bread.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "101196", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=101196", "title": "Gaeltacht", "text": "Gaeltacht\n\nIn Ireland, the term \"Gaeltacht\" refers individually to any, or collectively to all, of the districts where the government recognises that the Irish language is the predominant vernacular, or language of the home.\n\nThe Gaeltacht districts were first officially recognised during the 1920s in the early years of the Irish Free State, following the Gaelic Revival, as part of a government policy aimed at restoring the Irish language.\n\nIt is now recognised that the Gaeltacht is threatened by serious language decline. Research published in 2015 showed that of the 155 electoral divisions in the Gaeltacht, only 21 are communities where Irish is spoken on a daily basis by two-thirds or more of the population. Two-thirds is regarded by some academics as a tipping point for language survival.\n\nIn 1926 the official Gaeltacht was designated as a result of the report of the first Gaeltacht Commission \"Coimisiún na Gaeltachta\". The exact boundaries were not defined. The quota at the time for classification as Gaeltacht was 25%+ of the population to be Irish-speaking, although in many cases Gaeltacht status was accorded to areas that were linguistically weaker than this. The Irish Free State recognised that there were predominately Irish-speaking or semi-Irish-speaking districts in 15 of its 26 counties.\n\nIn the 1950s another Gaeltacht Commission concluded that the Gaeltacht boundaries were ill-defined. It recommended that Gaeltacht status be based solely on the strength of language use in an area. In the 1950s, Gaeltacht districts were initially defined precisely and excluded many areas in which the number of Irish speakers had declined. Gaeltacht areas were recognised in seven of the state's 26 counties (nominally Donegal, Galway, Mayo, Kerry, and Waterford).\n\nThe Gaeltacht boundaries have not officially been altered since then, apart from minor changes:\n\nA study in 2005 by \"An Chomhairle um Oideachas Gaeltachta agus Gaelscolaíochta\" (The Educational Council for Gaeltacht and Irish-Medium Schools, which was established in 2002 under the Education Act 1998) said that Gaeltacht schools were facing a crisis. It forecast that, without support, few of them would be teaching in Irish in 20 years' time. This would threaten the future of the Gaeltacht. Parents felt that the educational system did not support their efforts to pass on Irish as a living language to their children. The study added that a significant number of Gaeltacht schools had switched to teaching in English, and others were wavering.\n\nIn 2002 the third \"Coimisiún na Gaeltachta\" stated in its report that the erosion of the use of Irish in the Gaeltacht was now such that it was only a matter of time before the Gaeltacht disappeared. In some areas, Irish had already ceased to be a community language. Even in the strongest Gaeltacht areas, current patterns of bilingualism were leading to the dominance of English. Policies implemented by the State and voluntary groups were having no effect.\n\nThe report recommended that a new language reinforcement strategy was required, one that had the confidence of the community itself. The Commission recommended, among many other things, that the boundaries of the official Gaeltacht should be redrawn. It also recommended a comprehensive linguistic study to assess the vitality of the Irish language in the remaining Gaeltacht districts.\n\nThe study was undertaken by \"Acadamh na hOllscolaíochta Gaeilge\" (part of the National University of Ireland, Galway). On 1 November 2007 \"Staidéar Cuimsitheach Teangeolaíoch ar Úsáid na Gaeilge sa Ghaeltacht\" (\"A Comprehensive Linguistic Study of the Usage of Irish in the Gaeltacht\") was published.\n\nConcerning Gaeltacht boundaries, it suggested creating three linguistic zones within the Gaeltacht region:\n\n\nThe report suggested that Category A districts should be the State's priority in providing services through Irish and development schemes. It also said that Category C areas that showed a further decline in the use of Irish should lose their Gaeltacht status.\n\nThe 2006 Census data shows that of the 95,000 people living within the official Gaeltacht, approximately 17,000 belonged to Category A areas, 10,000 to Category B, and 17,000 to Category C, leaving about 50,000 in Gaeltacht areas that did not meet the minimum criteria. In response to this situation, the government introduced the Gaeltacht Bill 2012. Its stated aim was to provide for a new definition of boundaries based on language criteria, but it was criticised for doing the opposite of this.\n\nCritics drew attention to Section 7 of the Bill, which stated that all areas \"currently within the Gaeltacht\" would maintain their current Gaeltacht status, regardless of whether Irish was used. This status could only be revoked if the area failed to prepare a language plan (with no necessary relationship to the documented number of speakers). The Bill was also criticised for placing all responsibility for the maintenance of Irish on voluntary organisations, with no increase in government resources.\n\nThe annual report in 2012 by the Language Commissioner for Irish reinforced these criticisms by emphasising the failure of the State to provide Irish-language services to Irish speakers in the Gaeltacht and elsewhere. The report said that Irish in the Gaeltacht was now at its most fragile and that the State could not expect that Irish would survive as a community language if the State kept forcing the use of English on Gaeltacht communities.\n\nA report published in 2015, \"Nuashonrú ar an Staidéar Cuimsitheach Teangeolaíoch ar Úsáid na Gaeilge sa Ghaeltacht: 2006–2011\", said that on present indicators, Irish will cease to be used as a community language in the Gaeltacht within ten years. This finding has not been universally accepted. \n\nThe Department of Community, Rural and Gaeltacht Affairs, under the leadership of the Minister for Community, Rural and Gaeltacht Affairs, is responsible for the overall Irish Government policy with respect to the Gaeltacht, and supervises the work of the \"Údarás na Gaeltachta\" and other bodies. \"RTÉ Raidió na Gaeltachta\" is the \"Raidió Teilifís Éireann\" (RTÉ) radio station serving the Gaeltacht and Irish speakers generally. TG4 is the television station which is focused on promoting the Irish language and is based in the County Galway Gaeltacht.\n\nIn March 2005, Minister for Community, Rural and Gaeltacht Affairs Éamon Ó Cuív announced that the government of Ireland would begin listing only the Irish language versions of place names in the Gaeltachtaí as the official names, stripping the official Ordnance Survey of their English equivalents, to bring them up to date with road signs in the Gaeltacht, which have been in Irish only since 1970. This was done under a Placenames Order made under the Official Languages Act.\n\nAt the time of the 2006 census of the Republic of Ireland, the population of the Gaeltacht was 91,862, approximately 2.1% of the state's 4,239,848 people, with major concentrations of Irish speakers located in the western counties of Donegal, Mayo, Galway, and Kerry. There were smaller concentrations in the counties of Cork and Waterford in the south and Meath in the east. The most recent census of 2016 however shows that the population of the Gaeltacht was 96,090. This shows a rise of 4.5% from 2006.\nThe Gaeltacht districts have historically suffered from mass migration. Being at the edge of the island they always had fewer railways and roads, and poorer land to farm. Other influences have been the arrival of non-Irish speaking families, the marginal role of the Irish language in the education system and general pressure from the English-speaking community. There is no evidence that periods of relative prosperity have materially improved the situation of the language.\n\nThe Donegal (or Tyrconnell) Gaeltacht ( or \"Gaeltacht Thír Chonaill\") has a population of 24,744 (Census 2011) and represents 25% of the total Gaeltacht population. The Donegal Gaeltacht encompasses a geographical area of . This represents 26% of total Gaeltacht land area. The three parishes of the Rosses, Gweedore and Cloughaneely constitute the main centre of population of the Donegal Gaeltacht. There are over 17,132 Irish speakers, 14,500 in areas where it is spoken by 30–100% of the population and 2,500 in areas where it is spoken by less than 30%. In 2006 there were 2,436 people employed in a full-time capacity in Údarás na Gaeltachta client companies in the Donegal Gaeltacht. This region is particularly popular with students of the Ulster dialect; each year thousands of students visit the area from Northern Ireland. Donegal is unique in the Gaeltacht regions, as its accent and dialect is unmistakably northern in character. The language has many similarities with Scottish Gaelic, which are not evident in other Irish dialects.\n\nGweedore in County Donegal is the largest Gaeltacht parish in Ireland, which is home to regional studios of \"RTÉ Raidió na Gaeltachta\". It has produced well-known traditional musicians, including the bands Altan and Clannad, as well as the artist Enya. All three have recorded music in Irish.\n\nThe Galway County () and Galway City () Gaeltachtaí have a combined population of 48,907 and represent 47% of total Gaeltacht population. The Galway Gaeltacht encompasses a geographical area of . This represents 26% of total Gaeltacht land area.\n\nThere is also a third-level constituent college of NUIG called Acadamh na hOllscolaíochta Gaeilge in An Cheathrú Rua and Carna. The national Irish-language radio station Raidió na Gaeltachta is located in Casla, \"Tuairisc\" online newspaper in Bearna, and national TV station TG4 in Baile na hAbhann. Galway city is home to the Irish language theatre Taibhdhearc na Gaillimhe.\n\nThe Kerry Gaeltacht () consists of two areas – the western half of Gaeltacht Corca Dhuibhne (\"Dingle Peninsula\") and central and western parts of Iveragh Peninsula (\"Uíbh Ráthach\"). The largest settlement in Corca Dhuibhne is Dingle and the largest in Iveragh Peninsula is Ballinskelligs. The Kerry Gaeltacht has a population of 8,729 (6,185 Irish speakers) and represents 9% of total Gaeltacht population. The Kerry Gaeltacht encompasses a geographical area of . This represents 9% of the total Gaeltacht area.\n\nThe Mayo Gaeltacht () as of 2011 has a total population of 10,886 and represents 11.5% of the total Gaeltacht population. The Mayo Gaeltacht encompasses a geographical area of . This represents 19% of the total Gaeltacht land area and comprises three distinct areas – Erris, Achill Island and Toormakeady. There are 6,667 Irish speakers, with 4,000 living in areas where the language is spoken by 30–100% of the population and 2,500 living in areas where it is spoken by less than 30%.\n\nThe Cork Gaeltacht () consists of two areas – Muskerry and Cape Clear Island. The Muskerry Gaeltacht has a population of 3,895 people (2,951 Irish speakers) and represents 4% of the total Gaeltacht population. The Cork Gaeltacht encompasses a geographical area of . This represents 6% of the total Gaeltacht area. The largest Muskerry settlements are the villages of Baile Mhic Íre (Ballymakeera), Baile Bhuirne (Ballyvourney) and Béal Átha an Ghaorthaidh (Ballingeary).Cill na Martra (Kilnamartyra)\n\nThe Waterford Gaeltacht (Gaeltacht na nDéise, ) is ten kilometres (six miles) west of Dungarvan. It embraces the parishes of Rinn Ua gCuanach (Ring) and An Sean Phobal (Old Parish). The Waterford Gaeltacht has a population of 1,784 people (1,271 Irish speakers) and represents 2% of total Gaeltacht population.\n\nAll education in Gaeltacht na nDéise is carried out through the medium of Irish. There are two Pre-schools, two Primary level national schools, one Secondary School, Meánscoil San Nioclás and Coláiste na Rinne, a private boarding school and summer college. Gaeltacht na nDéise was one of the few Gaeltacht areas in which the percentage of daily Irish speakers increased in the recent updated comprehensive linguistic survey of the Gaeltacht.\n\nThe Meath Gaeltacht () is the smallest Gaeltacht area and consists of the two villages of Ráth Cairn and Baile Ghib. Navan, from Baile Ghib, is the main urban centre within the region, with a population of more than 20,000. The Meath Gaeltacht has a population of 1,771 and represents 2% of the total Gaeltacht population. The Meath Gaeltacht encompasses a geographical area of . This represents 1% of the total Gaeltacht land area.\n\nThe Meath Gaeltacht has a history quite different from that of the country's other Irish speaking regions. The two Gaeltachtaí of Baile Ghib and Ráth Cairn are resettled communities. The Ráth Cairn Gaeltacht was founded in 1935 when 41 families from Connemara in West Galway were resettled on land previously acquired by the Irish Land Commission. Each was given to farm. Baile Ghib (formerly Gibbstown) was settled in the same way in 1937, along with Baile Ailin (formerly Allenstown). In the early years a large percentage of the population returned to Galway or emigrated, but enough Irish speakers remained to ensure that Ráth Cairn and Baile Ghib were awarded Gaeltacht status in 1967. The original aim of spreading the Irish language into the local community met with no success, and the colonists had to become bilingual.\n\nIn 2001, the British government ratified the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages. Irish (in Northern Ireland) was specified under Part III of the Charter, giving it a status comparable to that of the Welsh language or Scottish Gaelic. This included undertakings in relation to education, translation of statutes, interaction with public authorities, the use of placenames, media access, support for cultural activities and other matters. Compliance with the state's obligations is assessed periodically by a Committee of Experts of the Council of Europe.\n\nThe Gaeltacht Quarter, Belfast (\"An Cheathrú Ghaeltachta\") is an area in Belfast where the Irish language is actively promoted. It is situated mainly along the Falls Road and has Gaelscoileanna (Irish-medium primary schools), a Gaelcholáiste (Irish-medium secondary school) and Naíonraí (crèches), together with a restaurant and agencies where Irish is used and Cultúrlann McAdam Ó Fiaich, a cultural centre which also houses Raidió Fáilte (Northern Ireland's only full-time Irish-language radio station). This has grown from the Shaw's Road urban Gaeltacht in the southwest of Belfast. St. Mary's University College Belfast, also situated on the Falls Road, is the only teaching college with a dedicated Irish Medium Unit. It is also home to \"An t-Aisionad\" (resource centre) which translates literature into Irish and publishes it for use in schools and other organisations in Ireland.\n\nAn area in southern County Londonderry centred on Slaghtneill (\"Sleacht Néill\") and Carntogher (\"Carn Tóchair\"), which had gone from being 50% Irish-speaking in 1901 to having only a few speakers by the end of the century, has seen a language revival since the setting up of a naíscoil in 1993 and a gaelscoil in 1994. In 2008 two local organisations launched a \"strategy for the rebirth of the Gaeltacht\", based on Irish-medium primary and secondary education. Speaking at the launch, Éamon Ó Cuív, the Republic's Minister for the Gaeltacht, said that the area was \"an example to other areas all over Ireland which are working to reestablish Irish as a community language\".\n\nDublin and its suburbs are reported to be the site of the largest number of daily Irish speakers, with 14,229 persons speaking Irish daily, representing 18 percent of all daily speakers. In a survey of a small sample of adults who had grown up in Dublin and had completed full-time education, 54% of respondents reported some fluency in Irish, ranging from being able to make small talk to complete fluency. Only 19% of speakers spoke Irish three or more times per week, with a plurality (43%) speaking Irish less than once a fortnight.\n\nParts of County Clare were recognised as Gaeltacht areas following recommendations made by Coimisiún na Gaeltachta 1925. This was enacted by law under the Gaeltacht (Housing) Acts 1929-2001. There were Irish speakers west of Ennis in Kilmihil, Kilrush, Doonbeg, Doolin, Ennistimon, Carrigaholt, Lisdoonvarna and Ballyvaughan.\n\nStatutory Rules and Orders 1933 No. 85 Vocational Education (Gaeltacht) Area 1933 was made under section 103 of the Vocational Education Act 1930 and sets outs the names of District Electoral Divisions in Ennis, Ennistymon, Kilrush and Miltown Malbay that form part of the Gaeltacht in the Administrative County of Clare. This Statutory Instrument (S.I. No. 85 of 1933) appears to be still on the statute books.\n\nIn West Clare a group called Coiste Forbartha Gaeltachta Chontae an Chláir (The Clare Irish Language Speaking Development Committee) aims to have the area recognised once more as a Gaeltacht through measures, structures and funding aimed at restoring the Irish language. It has been claimed that native speakers who received grants under Scéim Labhairt na Gaeilge, a scheme first established by the State in 1933 to encourage the use of Irish in Gaeltacht regions, still live in the county and speak the language daily. It has also been claimed that there are up to 170 people in County Clare who are daily speakers of Irish. The committee aims to develop local networks amongst Irish speakers in County Clare and elsewhere until such time as recognition is obtained.\n\nOn Bank Holiday Monday, 6th August 2018, \"Club Leabhar Chill Mhíchíl 2018 - Kilmihil Irish Language Book Club\" was established during Kilmihil Festival of Fun to perfect the use of the Irsh Language through Irish language books and bilingual books and An tAifreann mass leaflets.\n\nIn December 2018, Coiste Forbartha Gaeltachta Chontae an Chláir published its seventh annual edition of \"In Ard an Tráthnóna Siar\" [2012-2018], the Kilmihil-based Irish language journal devoted to the restoration of traditional Irish in West Clare and among our neighbours in surounding counties who keep in touch with the language in an effort to revive it in their homes forthwith.\n\nOn Census night 2016, there were up to 300 daily Irish speakers in County Clare. \n\nIn December 2016, the language committee published its first cárta Nóllag / Christmas Card and its first innovative calendar title Féilire na nGael 2017 and its third information stand to commemorate the decline of Clare Irish. The committee published an illustrative guide to Cúirt an Mheán Oíche and a sunburst and sword of light crest to remind people of the Easter Rising 1916 throughout Ireland including West Clare. The committee also secured the publication of Leabhar na Beatha in Kilmihil from 2016 to 2018. \n\nThe objective of Gaeltacht Chontae an Chláir under the leadership of Seosamh Mac Ionnrachtaigh is to preserve what's left of Clare Irish up to the current date and to encourage self-contained local language development networks independent of each other to take more to street Irish and Irish in the home and its steady development and progress at community level without State intervention except where deemed appropriate. Language planning measures are in train but the resurgence of Clare Irish will be a difficult path without individual effort at all age groups across Clare. \n\nThe Irish Language Grant Scheme promotes public interest in the language, an appreciation of the language and practice of the language. The scheme improves the standard of written Irish and revitalises Irish in the county.\n\nThe leading traditional Irish language dictionary on spoken native Irish is Impreasin na Gaeilge A-H and Impreasin na Gaeilge I - Z or Impressions of the Irish Language by Seosamh Mac Ionnrachtaigh from Kilrush West Clare.\n\nThe Permanent North American Gaeltacht is an area near Erinsville, Ontario in Canada. It has no permanent residents but serves as a resource centre for Irish speakers throughout North America. It was officially opened in 2007.\n\nIrish colleges are residential Irish language summer courses that give students the opportunity to be totally immersed in the language, usually for periods of three weeks over the summer months. During these courses, students attend classes and participate in a variety of different activities games, music, art and sport. There are a number of different Irish colleges for students to choose from throughout the country. Many of the colleges while providing a number of activities and events for young people through the Irish language will be known for or specialise in a specific category. For example, Coláiste Lurgan is commonly known for its promotion of the Irish language through music, Coláiste Aodáin for water sports and team games, and others for GAA sports.\n\nAs with the conventional schools, the Department of Education sets out requirements for class sizes and qualifications required by teachers. Some courses are college based and others provide for residence with host families in Gaeltacht areas, such as Ros Muc in Galway, Ráth Cairn in County Meath, and Teileann and Rann na Feirste in County Donegal, with instruction given by a \"bean an tí\", or Irish-speaking landlady.\nPopular Irish colleges/Gaeltachts include: Lurgan, Spleodar, Colaiste Sheosaimh and Uisce. Most Irish language summer colleges for teenagers in the Gaeltacht are supported and represented by CONCOS, who are based in Leitir Móir.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "102065", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=102065", "title": "Shibboleth", "text": "Shibboleth\n\nA shibboleth () is any custom or tradition, usually a choice of phrasing or even a single word, that distinguishes one group of people from another. Shibboleths have been used throughout history in many societies as passwords, simple ways of self-identification, signaling loyalty and affinity, maintaining traditional segregation, or protecting from real or perceived threats.\n\nThe term originates from the Hebrew word \"shibbólet\" (), which literally means the part of a plant containing grain, such as the head of a stalk of wheat or rye; or less commonly (but arguably more appositely) \"flood, torrent\".\n\nThe modern use derives from an account in the Hebrew Bible, in which pronunciation of this word was used to distinguish Ephraimites, whose dialect used a differently sounding first consonant. The difference concerns the Hebrew letter \"shin\", which is now pronounced as (as in \"shoe\"). In the Book of Judges, chapter 12, after the inhabitants of Gilead inflicted a military defeat upon the invading tribe of Ephraim (around 1370–1070 BCE), the surviving Ephraimites tried to cross the River Jordan back into their home territory and the Gileadites secured the river's fords to stop them. To identify and kill these Ephraimites, the Gileadites told each suspected survivor to say the word \"shibboleth\". The Ephraimite dialect resulted in a pronunciation that, to Gileadites, sounded like \"sibboleth\". In the King James Bible the anecdote appears thus (with the word already in its current English spelling):\nAnd the Gileadites took the passages of Jordan before the Ephraimites: and it was so, that when those Ephraimites which were escaped said, Let me go over; that the men of Gilead said unto him, Art thou an Ephraimite? If he said, Nay;Then said they unto him, Say now Shibboleth: and he said Sibboleth: for he could not frame to pronounce it right. Then they took him, and slew him at the passages of Jordan: and there fell at that time of the Ephraimites forty and two thousand.\n\nIn modern American English, a shibboleth can have a sociological meaning, referring to any in-group word or phrase that can distinguish members from outsiders – even when not used by a hostile other group. It is also sometimes used in a broader sense to mean jargon, the proper use of which identifies speakers as members of a particular group or subculture.\n\nThe term shibboleth can be extended, as in the discipline of semiotics, to describe non-linguistic elements of culture such as diet, fashion and cultural values. Cultural touchstones and shared experience can also be shibboleths of a sort. For example, people about the same age who are from the same nation tend to have the same memories of popular songs, television shows, and events from their formative years. One-hit wonders prove particularly distinctive. Much the same is true of alumni of a particular school, veterans of military service, and other groups. Discussing such memories is a common way of bonding. In-jokes can be a similar type of shared-experience shibboleth.\n\nIn information technology a shibboleth is a community-wide password that enables members of that community to access an online resource without revealing their individual identities. The origin server can vouch for the identity of the individual user without giving the target server any further identifying information. Hence the individual user does not know the password that is actually employed – it is generated internally by the origin server – and so cannot betray it to outsiders.\n\nThe term can also be used pejoratively, suggesting that the original meaning of a symbol has in effect been lost and that the symbol now serves merely to identify allegiance, being described as \"nothing more than a shibboleth\". In 1956, Nobel Prize-laureate economist Paul Samuelson applied the term \"shibboleth\" in works including \"Foundations of Economic Analysis\" to an idea for which \"the means becomes the end, and the letter of the law takes precedence over the spirit.\" Samuelson admitted that \"shibboleth\" is an imperfect term for this phenomenon.\n\nShibboleths have been used by different subcultures throughout the world at different times. Regional differences, level of expertise, and computer coding techniques are several forms that shibboleths have taken.\n\nThe legend goes that before the Guldensporenslag (Battle of the Golden Spurs) in May 1302, the Flemish slaughtered every Frenchman they could find in the city of Bruges, an act known as the \"Brugse Metten\". They identified Frenchmen based on their inability to pronounce the Flemish phrase ' (shield and friend), or possibly ' (friend of the Guilds). However, many Medieval Flemish dialects did not contain the cluster \"sch-\" either (even today's Kortrijk dialect has \"sk-\"), and Medieval French rolled the r just as Flemish did.\n\n\"Bûter, brea, en griene tsiis; wa't dat net sizze kin, is gjin oprjochte Fries\" () means \"Butter, rye bread and green cheese, whoever cannot say that is not a genuine Frisian\" was used by the Frisian Pier Gerlofs Donia during a Frisian rebellion (1515–1523). Ships whose crew could not pronounce this properly were usually plundered and soldiers who could not were beheaded by Donia himself.\n\nThe Dutch used the name of the seaside town of Scheveningen as a shibboleth to tell Germans from the Dutch (\"Sch\" in Dutch is analyzed as the letter \"s\" and the digraph \"ch\", producing the consonant cluster , while in German it is analyzed as the trigraph \"sch,\" pronounced ).\n\nIn Sardinia, 28 April is celebrated as \"sa dii de s'aciappa\" (the day of pursuit and capture) or Sa die de sa Sardigna (Sardinia's Day). On that date in 1794 people in Cagliari chased suspected officers of the ruling Piedmontese king and asked them to say \"nara cixidi\" (Sardinian for ‘chickpea’), which the Piedmontese could not pronounce. Some 514 officers were thus identified and sent back to the mainland.\n\nIn October 1937, the Spanish word for parsley, \"perejil\", was used as a shibboleth to identify Haitian immigrants living along the border in the Dominican Republic. The president of the Dominican Republic, Rafael Trujillo, ordered the execution of these people. It is alleged that between 20,000 and 30,000 individuals were murdered within a few days in the Parsley Massacre, although more recent scholarship and the lack of evidence such as mass graves puts the actual total closer to 1,000.\n\nDuring the Black July riots of Sri Lanka in 1983, many Tamils were massacred by Sinhalese youths. In many cases these massacres took the form of boarding buses and getting the passengers to pronounce words that had hard BAs at the start of the word (like \"Baldiya\" – bucket) and executing the people who found it difficult.\n\nDuring World War II, some United States soldiers in the Pacific theater used the word \"\" as a shibboleth to challenge unidentified persons, on the premise that Japanese people often pronounce the letter L as R or confuse Rs with Ls. In Oliver Gramling's \"Free Men are Fighting: The Story of World War II\" (1942) the author notes that, in the war, Japanese spies would often approach checkpoints posing as American or Filipino military personnel. A shibboleth such as \"lollapalooza\" would be used by the sentry, who, if the first two syllables come back as \"rorra,\" would \"open fire without waiting to hear the remainder\".\n\nDuring the Allied breakout from the Normandy beachheads in 1944, hand-to-hand fighting occurred throughout the hedgerows and thick undergrowth of the Norman countryside. British and American troops were told to use the word \"Thunderer\" as a countersign through the thick foliage. Given the number of syllables and the leading \"th\" sound, it was believed that the word would invariably be mispronounced by native German speakers.\n\nDuring The Troubles in Northern Ireland, use of the name Derry or Londonderry for the province's second-largest city was often taken as an indication of the speaker's political stance, and as such frequently implied more than simply naming the location. The pronunciation of the name of the letter H is a related shibboleth, with Catholics and Protestants often pronouncing the letter differently.\n\nIn Australia and New Zealand, the words \"fish and chips\" are often used to highlight the difference in each country's short-i vowel sound [ɪ] and asking someone to say the phrase can identify which country they are from. Australian English has a higher forward sound [i], close to the y in happy and city, while New Zealand English has a lower backward sound [ɘ], a slightly higher version of the a in about and comma. Thus, New Zealanders hear Australians say \"feesh and cheeps,\" while Australians hear New Zealanders say \"fush and chups.\"\n\nA \"furtive shibboleth\" is a type of a shibboleth which identifies individuals as being part of a group, not based on their ability to pronounce one or more words, but on their ability to recognize a seemingly-innocuous phrase as a secret message. For example, members of Alcoholics Anonymous sometimes refer to themselves as \"a friend of Bill W.\", which is a reference to AA's founder, William Griffith Wilson. To the unindoctrinated, this would seem like a casual – if off-topic – remark, but other AA members would understand its meaning.\n\nSimilarly, during World War II, a homosexual US sailor might call himself a \"friend of Dorothy\", a tongue-in-cheek acknowledgment of a stereotypical affinity for Judy Garland in \"The Wizard of Oz\". This code was so effective that even after the higher command learned that the phrase was a way for gay sailors to identify each other, they failed to recognize its origins, and purportedly invested a great deal of time and effort into hunting down this \"Dorothy\", whom they assumed to be an actual woman who was somehow assisting and organizing homosexual servicemen.\n\nMark Twain used an explicit shibboleth to conceal a furtive shibboleth. In \"The Innocents Abroad\" he told the Shibboleth story in seemingly \"inept and uninteresting\" detail. To the initiated, however, the wording revealed that he, Twain, was a freemason.\n\nColombian conceptual artist Doris Salcedo created a work titled \"Shibboleth\" at Tate Modern, London, in 2007–2008. The piece consisted of a 548-foot-long crack that bisected the floor of the Tate's lobby space.\n\nSalcedo said of the work:\nIn an episode of \"The West Wing\" titled \"Shibboleth\", President Bartlet discusses the meaning of the word at length. His advisors believe it is a catch phrase or cliche, after which Bartlet reminds them of its earlier biblical significance. He later becomes certain that a group of Chinese religious asylum seekers are indeed Christian when their representative uses the word to refer to his faith during a meeting.\n"}
{"id": "102593", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=102593", "title": "Uninflected word", "text": "Uninflected word\n\nIn linguistic morphology, an uninflected word is a word that has no morphological markers (inflection) such as affixes, ablaut, consonant gradation, etc., indicating declension or conjugation. If a word has an uninflected form, this is usually the form used as the lemma for the word.\n\nIn English and many other languages, uninflected words include prepositions, interjections, and conjunctions, often called invariable words. These cannot be inflected under any circumstances (unless they are used as different parts of speech, as in \"ifs and buts\").\n\nOnly words that cannot be inflected at all are called \"invariable\". In the strict sense of the term \"uninflected\", only invariable words are uninflected, but in broader linguistic usage, these terms are extended to be inflectable words that appear in their basic form. For example, English nouns are said to be uninflected in the singular, while they show inflection in the plural (represented by the affix \"-s/-es\"). The term \"uninflected\" can also refer to uninflectability with respect to one or more, but not all, morphological features; for example, one can say that Japanese verbs are uninflected for person and number, but they do inflect for tense, politeness, and several moods and aspects.\n\nIn the strict sense, among English nouns only mass nouns (such as \"sand\", \"information\", or \"equipment\") are truly uninflected, since they have only one form that does not change; count nouns are always inflected for number, even if the singular inflection is shown by an \"invisible\" affix (the null morpheme). In the same way, English verbs are inflected for person and tense even if the morphology showing those categories is realized as null morphemes. In contrast, other analytic languages like Mandarin Chinese have true uninflected nouns and verbs, where the notions of number and tense are completely absent. \n\nIn many inflected languages, such as Greek and Russian, some nouns and adjectives of foreign origin are left uninflected in contexts where native words would be inflected; for instance, the name \"Abraam\" in Greek (from Hebrew), the Modern Greek word μπλε \"ble\" (from French \"bleu\"), the Italian word \"computer\", and the Russian words , (kangaroo) and , (coat, from French \"paletot\").\n\nIn German, all modal particles are uninflected.\n\n"}
{"id": "103615", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=103615", "title": "Firth", "text": "Firth\n\nFirth is a word in the Scots and English languages used to denote various coastal waters in Scotland and even a strait. In the Northern Isles, it more usually refers to a smaller inlet. It is linguistically cognate to \"fjord\" (both from Proto-Germanic *\"ferþuz\") which has a more constrained sense in English. Bodies of water named \"firths\" tend to be more common on the east coast, or in the southwest of the country, although the Firth of Lorn is an exception to this. The Highland coast contains numerous estuaries, straits, and inlets of a similar kind, but not called \"firth\" (e.g. the Minch and Loch Torridon); instead, these are often called sea lochs. Before about 1850, the spelling \"Frith\" was more common.\n\nA firth is generally the result of ice age glaciation and is very often associated with a large river, where erosion caused by the tidal effects of incoming sea water passing upriver has widened the riverbed into an estuary. Demarcation can be rather vague. The Firth of Clyde is sometimes thought to include the estuary as far upriver as Dumbarton, but the Ordnance Survey map shows the change from river to firth occurring off Port Glasgow, while locally the change is held to be at the Tail of the Bank where the river crosses a sandbar off Greenock at the junction to the Gare Loch, or even further west at Gourock point. \n\nHowever, some firths are exceptions. The Cromarty Firth on the east coast of Scotland, for example, resembles a large loch with only a relatively small outlet to the sea and the Solway Firth and the Moray Firth are more like extremely large bays. The Pentland Firth is a strait rather than a bay or an inlet.\n\n\nThese are connected to, or form part of, the North Sea.\n\n\n\nThe Northern Isles were part of Norway until the 15th century, and retain many Norse names. In Shetland in particular, \"firth\" can refer to smaller inlets, although geo, voe and wick are as common. In Orkney, \"wick\" is common.\n\n\nIn the Scottish Gaelic language, \"linne\" is used to refer to most of the firths above; it is also applied to the Sound of Sleat, Crowlin Sound, Cuillin Sound, Sound of Jura, Sound of Raasay, and part of Loch Linnhe.\n\nThe following is a selection of other bodies of water in Scotland which are similar to various firths, but which are not termed such –\n\nLikewise, in the Northern Isles, the words \"firth\" and \"sound\" are often used arbitrarily or interchangeably. Bluemull Sound for example, is very similar to some of the firths in the Shetland Islands.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "105402", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=105402", "title": "Buffalo wing", "text": "Buffalo wing\n\nA Buffalo wing, in the cuisine of the United States, is an unbreaded chicken wing section (flat or drumette) that is generally deep-fried then coated or dipped in a sauce consisting of a vinegar-based cayenne pepper hot sauce and melted butter prior to serving. The Buffalo wing was invented in 1964 at Anchor Bar in Buffalo, New York by Teressa Bellissimo. They are generally served hot, along with celery sticks and carrot sticks with blue cheese dressing for dipping. \n\nBuffalo wings have gained in popularity in the United States and abroad, with some North American restaurant chains featuring them as a main menu item. The name \"Buffalo\" is now also applied to other spiced fried foods served with dipping sauces, including boneless chicken \"fingers\", chicken fries, chicken nuggets, popcorn chicken, and shrimp. It also describes other dishes, such as pizza, that are seasoned with the Buffalo-style sauce or a Buffalo flavor seasoning.\n\nThere are several different claims about the invention of Buffalo wings. One of the claims is that Buffalo wings were first prepared at the Anchor Bar in Buffalo, New York, by Teressa Bellissimo, who owned the bar with husband Frank in 1964. At the time chicken wings were inexpensive and undesirable, primarily being used for stock or soup.\n\nSeveral versions of the story of the invention of the Buffalo wing have been circulated by the Bellissimo family and others including:\n\n\nAlthough an article published about the Anchor Bar in a local newspaper during 1969 does not mention Buffalo wings, a local competitor of the Anchor Bar, Duff's Famous Wings, began selling Buffalo wings in that year.\n\n\nIn 1977 the city of Buffalo issued an official proclamation celebrating Anchor Bar co-owner Frank Bellissimo and declared July 29, 1977 to be Chicken Wing Day. Throughout the 1970s and 1980s Buffalo wings gained in popularity as a bar food and appetizer across the United States and Canada. Large franchises specializing in Buffalo wings have emerged, notably Buffalo Wild Wings founded in 1982 and Hooter's in 1983. McDonald's began selling Mighty Wings as an optional item in 1990 at their restaurant locations in the United States. In 1994, following four Super Bowl appearances by the Buffalo Bills football team, the Domino's pizza chain added Buffalo wings to their national menu, followed by Pizza Hut the next year.\n\nAs the market for chicken wings became larger, restaurants began to create and use a variety of sauces in addition to buffalo sauce. Some of these new chicken wing sauces were influenced by Chinese, Japanese, Thai, Caribbean, and Indian cuisines. Other flavors created by restaurants include unique combinations, such as Blueberry BBQ Wing Sauce and Maple/Bacon Glaze for example, to help keep customer interest and grow their businesses. Because of the increased cost in the price of chicken wings, and a desire by some diners for a neater eating experience, restaurants began to offer a menu item called \"boneless wings,\" sometimes marketed under the name wyngz. Boneless wings are essentially small pieces of skinless, boneless chicken breast that are coated in flour and spices then fried or baked. They are usually coated in or served with similar sauces as chicken wings. The growth of popularity in recent years in Buffalo wing consumption and restaurants serving wings have led to actual and perceived shortages of chicken wings in the United States during certain times.\n\nIn many areas of the United States chicken wing festivals are held with Buffalo wings being used in competitive eating events, such as at Philadelphia's Wing Bowl and the National Buffalo Wing Festival. It has also become commonplace for restaurants to offer a wing eating contest featuring a customer eating a certain number of wings, coated in their hottest sauce during a set period of time. Many bars and restaurants intentionally create an extra-hot sauce for this purpose, and customers are usually rewarded with their picture posted on the restaurant's wall or website, a commemorative T-shirt, a free meal or a combination of rewards for successfully completing the challenge.\n\nThe chicken wings used for Buffalo wings are usually segmented into three parts: drumette, flat, and flapper or pointer, the last of which is discarded. Typically, the wings are deep-fried in oil, without breading or flour until they are well browned. Alternatively, they may be baked, grilled, or broiled.\n\nCayenne pepper, hot sauce and melted butter or margarine are the base of the Buffalo wing sauce, which may be made mild, medium, or hot. Commercial ready-to-use wing sauce is made with varying levels of spiciness. The cooked chicken wings are placed in a bowl or pot and shaken to coat the wings completely covering them in sauce before serving.\n\nTraditionally, Buffalo wings are usually served with small sticks of celery and blue cheese dipping sauce on the side. Ranch dressing, however, is the most popular wing dipping sauce in the United States and wings are often served with sliced carrots or whole baby carrots.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "105770", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=105770", "title": "Diet Coke", "text": "Diet Coke\n\nDiet Coke (called Coca-Cola Light in some countries) is a sugar-free and no-calorie soft drink produced and distributed by The Coca-Cola Company. It contains artificial sweeteners instead of sugar. Unveiled on July 8, 1982 and introduced in the United States on August 9, it was the first new brand since 1886 to use the Coca-Cola trademark. The product quickly overtook the company's existing diet cola, Tab, in sales.\n\nWhen Tab was released in 1963, the Coca-Cola Company refused to release a diet soda with the Coca-Cola name, fearing that its flagship brand might suffer. Its rival Pepsi had no such qualms, and after the long-term success of its sugar-free Diet Pepsi (launched in 1964) became clear, Coca-Cola decided to launch a competing sugar-free brand under the Coca-Cola name, which could be marketed more easily than Tab.\n\nDiet Coke does not use a modified form of the Coca-Cola recipe, but instead an entirely different formula. The controversial New Coke, introduced in 1985, used a version of the Diet Coke recipe that contained high fructose corn syrup and had a slightly different balance of ingredients. In 2004, Coca-Cola introduced Coca-Cola C2, which it claims tastes much closer to Coca-Cola but contains half the carbohydrates. In 2005, the company introduced Coca-Cola Zero (replaced by \"Coca-Cola Zero Sugar\" in 2017), a sugar-free variation of regular Coca-Cola.\n\nDiet Coke was sweetened with aspartame, an artificial sweetener, after the sweetener became available in the United States in 1983. Early on, to save money, this was also originally in a blend with saccharin. After Diet Rite cola advertised its 100 percent use of aspartame, and the manufacturer of NutraSweet (then G. D. Searle & Company) warned that the NutraSweet trademark would not be made available to a blend of sweeteners, Coca-Cola switched the formula to 100 percent NutraSweet. Diet Coke from fountain dispensers still contains some saccharin to extend shelf life.\n\nIn 2005, under pressure from retailer Walmart (which was impressed with the popularity of Splenda sweetener), the company released a new formulation called \"Diet Coke sweetened with Splenda\". Sucralose and acesulfame potassium replace aspartame in this version. Early sales were weaker than anticipated; however, Coca-Cola did little advertising for the brand, investing money and advertising in Coca-Cola Zero instead. By late 2009, some distributors had stopped supplying Diet Coke sweetened with Splenda.\n\nIn 2018, in an effort to be more appealing to millennials, Diet Coke began offering itself in a skinnier can (but still in 12 fluid ounces), and introduced four new flavors.\n\nDiet Coke and Diet Pepsi have capitalized on the markets of people who require low sugar regimens, such as diabetics and people concerned with calorie intake. In the UK, a 330 ml can of Diet Coke contains around 1.3 kilocalories (5 kilojoules) compared to 142 kilocalories (595 kJ) for a regular can of Coca-Cola.\n\nIn other countries in which cyclamates are not banned (as they were in the US in 1970), Diet Coke or Coca-Cola light may be sweetened with a blend containing cyclamates, aspartame, and acesulfame potassium.\n\n\nThe most commonly distributed version of Diet Coke (and the majority of beverages that contain artificial sweeteners) relies on aspartame, which has been suggested to pose health concerns. Aspartame is one of the most intensively scrutinized food additives.\n\nCoca-Cola has now released Diet Coke sweetened with sucralose (under the brand name Splenda), although it is not as common.\n\nThe sodium benzoate was found to break down mitochondrial DNA in living yeast cells. Research published in 2007 for the British government's Food Standards Agency suggests that sodium benzoate (E211) is linked to hyperactive behavior and decreased intelligence in children. In January 2008 sodium benzoate was removed from production lines for Diet Coke sold in the UK, however it remains in other Coke products and other production locations.\n\nAccording to the Coca-Cola Company, \"[t]he sweetener blend used for Diet Coke/Coca-Cola Light is formulated for each country based on consumer preference.\" Some countries began using the term \"Coca-Cola Light\" as early as the 1990s, with others adopting the name later on, while others continue the use of \"Diet Coke\".\n\n"}
{"id": "113092", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=113092", "title": "Twinkie", "text": "Twinkie\n\nA Twinkie is an American snack cake, marketed as a \"Golden Sponge Cake with Creamy Filling\". It was formerly made and distributed by Hostess Brands. The brand is currently owned by Hostess Brands, Inc. (), having been formerly owned by private equity firms Apollo Global Management and C. Dean Metropoulos and Company as the second incarnation of Hostess Brands. During bankruptcy proceedings, Twinkie production was suspended on November 21, 2012, and resumed after an absence of at least ten months from American store shelves, becoming available again nationwide on July 15, 2013.\n\nSaputo Incorporated's Vachon Inc., which owns the Canadian rights to the product and made them during their absence from the U.S. market, produce Twinkies in Canada at a bakery in Montreal. Twinkies are also available in Mexican stores as \"Submarinos\" and \"Twinkies\" made by Marinela, and as \"Tuinky\" made by Wonder; both Marinela and Wonder are subsidiaries of Mexican bread company Grupo Bimbo. In Egypt, Twinkies are produced under the company Edita. Twinkies are also available in the United Kingdom and Ireland under the Hostess brand name where they are sold in Sainsburys, Tesco, ASDA and B&M stores. Twinkies are produced and distributed by multiple commercial bakeries in China, where Hostess does not own the brand.\n\nTwinkies were invented in Schiller Park, Illinois on April 6, 1930, by James Alexander Dewar, a baker for the Continental Baking Company. Realizing that several machines used to make cream-filled strawberry shortcake sat idle when strawberries were out of season, Dewar conceived a snack cake filled with banana cream, which he dubbed the Twinkie. Ritchy Koph said he came up with the name when he saw a billboard in St. Louis for \"Twinkle Toe Shoes.\" During World War II, bananas were rationed and the company was forced to switch to vanilla cream. This change proved popular, and banana-cream Twinkies were not widely re-introduced. The original flavor was occasionally found in limited-time promotions, but the company used vanilla cream for most Twinkies. In 1988, Fruit and Cream Twinkies were introduced with a strawberry filling swirled into the cream. The product was soon dropped. Vanilla's dominance over banana flavoring would be challenged in 2005, following a month-long promotion of the movie \"King Kong\". Hostess saw its Twinkie sales rise 20 percent during the promotion, and in 2007 restored the banana-cream Twinkie to its snack lineup.\n\nOn January 11, 2012, parent company Hostess filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection. Twinkie sales for the year, , were 36 million packages, down almost 20% from a year earlier. Hostess said customers had migrated to healthier foods. On November 16, 2012, Hostess officially announced that it \"will be winding down operations and has filed a motion with the U.S. Bankruptcy Court seeking permission to close its business and sell its assets, including its iconic brands and facilities.\" Bakery operations were suspended at all plants.\nOn November 19, 2012, Hostess and the Bakers Union agreed to mediation, delaying the shutdown for two days. On November 21, 2012, U.S. bankruptcy judge Robert Drain approved Hostess' request to shut down, temporarily ending Twinkie production in the United States.\n\nOn March 18, 2013, it was reported that Twinkies would return to store shelves in May of that year. Twinkies, along with other famed Hostess Brands, were purchased out of bankruptcy by Apollo Global Management and Metropoulos & Co for $410 million.\nTwinkies returned to U.S. shelves on July 15, 2013. Apollo subsequently sold Hostess for $2.3 billion.\n\nBefore Hostess Brands filed for bankruptcy, Twinkies were reduced in size. They now contain and have a mass of 38.5 grams, while the original Twinkies contained and had a mass of 42.5 grams. The new Twinkies also have a longer shelf life of 45 days, which was also a change made before bankruptcy, compared to the 26 days of the original Twinkies.\n\nThe Twinkie became known worldwide in countries that did not sell the confection in 1984, due to a reference in the hit film \"Ghostbusters\". In the film, the character Egon Spengler describes a speculated level of psychokinetic energy and uses a regular Twinkie size to represent the normal level of such energy in New York City. He then says that based on a recent sample, the Twinkie representing New York would be over long and weigh approximately , to which the character Winston Zeddemore replies, \"That's a big Twinkie.\"\n\nIn the 1988 blockbuster \"Die Hard\", LAPD Sergeant Al Powell is seen buying Twinkies at a gas station, to which the attendant says \"I thought you guys ate donuts?\". Powell replies, claiming that they are for his pregnant wife. It is later revealed to be his favourite snack, to the point that he is able to list all the ingredients to John McClane, claiming they are \"Just about everything a growing boy needs!\". He is also seen eating them in Die Hard 2.\n\nIn the film \"Ghost Rider 2\", the antagonist of the movie(whose ability is to decay everything he touches) struggles to eat an apple because it rots until he grabs a Twinkie, which to his surprise, does not decay/expire.\n\nIn the film \"Hollow Man\", Dr. Sebastian Caine says the following, when asked by a colleague how he solved the problem of creating a stable invisibility cell, \"Oh, you know, coffee and Twinkies!\" Later in the film, the invisible Dr. Caine is seen leisurely eating one whilst in bed.\n\nIn the film \"Zombieland\", one of the protagonists, Tallahassee, has a craving for Twinkies and stops to acquire some from a crashed van, even with the threat of zombies roaming the countryside.\n\nIn the movie \"WALL-E\", WALL-E gives his pet cockroach Twinkies, evidently still edible after humans have left earth 700 years ago.\n\nOn the ABC show \"Castle\", Richard Castle (Nathan Fillion) mentions having deep-fried Twinkies while reminiscing with his ex-wife Meredith (Darby Stanchfield).\n\nIn the film \"Mortal Engines\", Hester Shaw eats a Twinkie that is 1000 years old. She offers one to Tom Natsworthy, who questions it due to its extreme age. The \"Tw\" and \"s\" in the wrapper has been rubbed off and Hester refers to it as an \"Inkie\".\n\n\"Twinkie defense\" is a derisive label for an improbable legal defense. It is not a recognized legal defense in jurisprudence, but a catchall term coined by reporters during their coverage of the trial of defendant Dan White for the murders of San Francisco city Supervisor Harvey Milk and Mayor George Moscone. White's defense was that he suffered diminished capacity as a result of his depression. His change in diet from healthful food to Twinkies and other sugary foods was said to be a symptom of depression. Contrary to common belief, White's attorneys did not argue that the Twinkies were the cause of White's actions, but that their consumption was symptomatic of his underlying depression.\n\nJohn Fogerty's 2004 album \"Deja Vu All Over Again\" includes the satirical and somewhat world-weary song \"Nobody's Here Anymore\", which ponders people's infatuation with modern technology and its ever more sophisticated consumer devices. \"He got a stash of Twinkies up in his room\" is a line lamenting the self-absorption and social isolation of the protagonist of the song's first verse. Twinkies are also one of the products mentioned in \"Junk Food Junkie\", a Top 40 1976 novelty song by Larry Groce. \"Habits (Stay High)\", a 2013 song by Swedish singer Tove Lo, mentions Twinkies in the line \"I get home, I got the munchies / Binge on all my Twinkies / Throw up in the tub / Then I go to sleep.\" In an interview the singer confessed she had thought that \"twinkie\" was a synonym for \"cookie\" and that Hostess had sent her a sample of the product after the success of the song.\n\nJeffrey R. Holland a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) used the expression \"theological Twinkie\" at the Church's General Conference in April 1998, in reference to teaching methods that may be pleasing or entertaining, but lack sufficient spiritual and doctrinal substance. In his words: \"Are we really nurturing our youth and our new members in a way that will sustain them when the stresses of life appear? Or are we giving them a kind of theological Twinkie—spiritually empty calories?\" \n\nA common urban legend claims that Twinkies have an infinite shelf life, and can last unspoiled for a relatively long time of ten, fifty, or one hundred years due to the chemicals used in their production. A homage to the unlimited shelf life urban myth appears in the film \"WALL-E\", where the title character's pet cockroach is shown eating its way into the cream filling at one end and emerging out the other, none the worse for wear.\n\nThe third episode of \"Family Guy\"s second season entitled \"Da Boom\" follows the Griffin family after a nuclear holocaust occurs, due to Y2K on New Year's Eve. The family then travels in search of food, and eventually decide to establish a town around a Twinkie factory.\n\nAnother homage to the Twinkie's shelf life myth was shown in the 2016 animated film \"Sausage Party\", where a Twinkie is amongst the \"Non-Perishable\" foods.\n\nThe 2012 Super Bowl Chevy Silverado Apocalypse commercial also gives a nod to Twinkie's reputed durability.\n\nIn reality, Twinkies are on the shelf for a short time; a company executive told \"The New York Times\" in 2000 that the \"Twinkie is on the shelf no more than 7 to 10 days.\" The maximum shelf life was reported to have been 26 days, until the addition of stronger preservatives made beginning in 2012 increased it to 45 days. The 2009 apocalypse horror-comedy \"Zombieland\", which features a search for the last remaining Twinkies in a running gag, acknowledges this by having the character Tallahassee (played by Woody Harrelson) explain that Twinkies do, in fact, have an expiration date.In the second episode of The Umbrella Academy (TV series), the character called number 5 (player by Aidan Gallagher) states that the infinite shelf life is a lie.\n\nIn 2010, Kansas State University professor Mark Haub went on a \"convenience store\" diet consisting mainly of Twinkies, Oreos, and Doritos in an attempt to demonstrate to his students \"...that in weight loss, pure calorie counting is what matters most, not the nutritional value of the food.\" He lost over a two-month period, returning his body mass index (BMI) to within normal range. In addition to Twinkies, Haub ate Little Debbie snack cakes, cereals, cookies, brownies, Doritos, Oreos and other kinds of high calorie, low-nutrition foods that are usually found at convenience stores. However, despite calling it the \"Twinkie diet\", Haub also consumed a multivitamin, a protein shake and fresh vegetables along with the Twinkies, Oreos, and Doritos. Some protein shakes contain 80 grams protein per serving, almost equivalent to eating three 6-oz steaks per day. Besides the protein shake and multivitamin, Haub also ate nutritionally dense whole milk, carrots, and vitamin fortified cereal. This contradicts representations by other media outlets stating that Haub \"only\" ate junk food.\n\n"}
{"id": "113481", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=113481", "title": "Pianissimo (disambiguation)", "text": "Pianissimo (disambiguation)\n\nPianissimo is a term in music dynamics meaning \"to be played very softly.\"\n\nPianissimo may also refer to:\n\n\n"}
{"id": "140607", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=140607", "title": "Lasagne", "text": "Lasagne\n\nLasagne (, , ; singular lasagna) are a type of wide, flat pasta, possibly one of the oldest types of pasta. \"Lasagne\", or the singular \"lasagna\", commonly refers to a culinary dish made with stacked layers of pasta alternated with sauces and ingredients such as meats, vegetables and cheese, and sometimes topped with melted grated cheese. Typically, the cooked pasta is assembled with the other ingredients and then baked in an oven. The resulting lasagne casserole is cut into single-serving square portions.\n\nLasagne originated in Italy during the Middle Ages and has traditionally been ascribed to the city of Naples. The first recorded recipe was set down in the early 14th-century \"Liber de Coquina\" (\"The Book of Cookery\"). It bore only a slight resemblance to the later traditional form of lasagne, featuring a fermented dough flattened into a thin sheet, boiled, sprinkled with cheese and spices, and then eaten with the use of a small pointed stick. Recipes written in the century following the \"Liber de Coquina\" recommended boiling the pasta in chicken broth and dressing it with cheese and chicken fat. In a recipe adapted for the Lenten fast, walnuts were recommended.\n\nThe traditional lasagne of Naples, \"lasagne di carnevale\", is layered with local sausage, small fried meatballs, hard-boiled eggs, ricotta and mozzarella cheeses, and sauced with a Neapolitan ragù, a meat sauce. \"Lasagne al forno\", layered with a thicker ragù and Béchamel sauce, and corresponding to the most common version of the dish outside Italy, is traditionally associated with the Emilia-Romagna region of Italy. In other regions, lasagne can be made with various combinations of ricotta or mozzarella cheese, tomato sauce, meats (e.g., ground beef, pork or chicken), and vegetables (e.g., spinach, zucchini, olives, mushrooms), and the dish is typically flavoured with wine, garlic, onion, and oregano. In all cases, the lasagne is oven-baked (al forno).\n\nTraditionally, pasta dough prepared in Southern Italy used semolina and water; in the northern regions, where semolina was not available, flour and eggs were used. In modern Italy, since the only type of wheat allowed for commercially sold pasta is durum wheat, commercial lasagne are made of semolina from durum wheat.\n\nEmilia-Romagna's intensive farming economy in the northern region of Italy results in plentiful dairy and meat products, and a commonality in regional cooking – more so than the olive oil found in southern regions of Italy. Pastas from Emilia-Romagna and its capital, Bologna, are almost always served with a ragù, a thick sauce made from ingredients such as onions, carrots, finely ground pork and beef, celery, butter, and tomatoes.\n\nIn Ancient Rome, there was a dish similar to a traditional lasagne called \"lasana\" or \"lasanum\" (Latin for 'container' or 'pot') described in the book \"De re coquinaria\" by Marcus Gavius Apicius, but the word could have a more ancient origin. The first theory is that \"lasagne\" comes from Greek λάγανον (\"laganon\"), a flat sheet of pasta dough cut into strips. The word λαγάνα (\"lagana\") is still used in Greek to mean a flat thin type of unleavened bread baked for the holiday Clean Monday.\n\nAnother theory is that the word lasagne comes from the Greek λάσανα (\"lasana\") or λάσανον (\"lasanon\") meaning 'trivet', 'stand for a pot' or 'chamber pot'. The Romans borrowed the word as \"lasanum\", meaning 'cooking pot'. The Italians used the word to refer to the cookware in which lasagne is made. Later, the food took on the name of the serving dish.\n\nAnother proposed link, or reference, is the 14th-century English dish \"loseyn\" as described in \"The Forme of Cury\", a cookbook prepared by \"the chief Master Cooks of King Richard II\", which included English recipes as well as dishes influenced by Spanish, French, Italian, and Arab cuisines. This dish has similarities to modern lasagne in both its recipe, which features a layering of ingredients between pasta sheets, and its name. An important difference is the lack of tomatoes, which did not arrive in Europe until after Columbus reached America in 1492. The earliest discussion of the tomato in European literature appeared in a herbal written in 1544 by Pietro Andrea Mattioli, while the earliest cookbook found with tomato recipes was published in Naples in 1692, but the author had apparently obtained these recipes from Spanish sources.\n\nAs with most other types of pasta, the Italian word is a plural form: \"lasagne\" meaning more than one sheet of \"lasagna\", though in many other languages a derivative of the singular word \"lasagna\" is used for the popular baked pasta dish. Regional usage in Italy, when referring to the baked dish, favours the plural form \"lasagne\" in the north of the country and the singular \"lasagna\" in the south. The former, plural usage has influenced the usual spelling found in British English, while the southern Italian, singular usage has influenced the spelling often used in American English.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "140621", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=140621", "title": "Farang", "text": "Farang\n\nFarang () is a Persian word which refers to Franks, once the major Germanic tribe ruling Western Europe. In the Middle East, South Asia and Southeast Asia \"Farang\" refers to Europeans. This in turn comes from the Old French word \"\", meaning \"Frank\", a West Germanic tribe that became a major political power in Western and Central Europe during the early Middle Ages, and from which France derives its name. Because the Frankish Empire ruled a large part of Europe (France, Germany, Switzerland, Italy and Low Countries) for centuries, all Europeans and even Middle Easterners associated the word \"Frank\" with Latins who professed the Roman Catholic faith. \"Frangistan\" () was a term used by Muslims and Persians in particular, during the Middle Ages and later periods, to refer to Western or Latin Europe. Muslim traders referred to European traders as \"Farang\" and it also entered the local vernaculars of South Asia and Southeast Asia.\n\n\"Farang\" ( , colloquially) is a generic Thai word for person of white race no matter where they may come from. The \"Royal Institute Dictionary 1999\", the official dictionary of Thai words, defines the word as \"a person of white race\".\n\nEdmund Roberts, US envoy in 1833, defined the term as \"Frank (or European)\". People of mixed sub-Saharan African-European descent were called \"farang dam\" (; 'black farang') to distinguish them from white people. This began during the Vietnam War, when the United States military maintained bases in Thailand. The practice continues in present-day Bangkok.\n\nThe word \"farang\" is from Persian word \"farang\" () or \"farangī\" (), refers to Franks, the major Germanic tribe ruling Western Europe. \"Frangistan\" () was a term used by Muslims and Persians in particular, during the Middle Ages and later periods, to refer to Western or Latin Europe. According to Rashid al-din Fazl Allâh, \"farang\" comes from the Arabic word \"afranj\". In Ethiopia \"faranj\" means white/European people. During the Muslim Mughal Empire when the Europeans arrived in South Asia, the Persian word Farang was used to refer to them since the Muslims knew the Europeans during their Crusades wars in the Middle East. The words also added to local languages such as Hindi and Nepali as \"firangi\" (Devanāgarī: फिरंगी). The word was pronounced \"paranki\" (പറങ്കി) in Malayalam, \"parangiar\" in Tamil, entered Khmer as \"barang\", and Malay as \"ferenggi\". From there the term spread into China as \"folangji\" (佛郎機), which was used to refer to the Portuguese and their breech-loading swivel guns when they first arrived in China.\n\n\"Farang\" is also the Thai word for the guava fruit, introduced by Portuguese traders over 400 years ago.\n\n\"Farang\" is also the Thai word for foreigners, used especially among the bar girls and prostitutes.\n\n\"Farang khi nok\" (Thai: ฝรั่งขี้นก) is slang commonly used as an insult to a person of white race whose is rude, having extremely bad manners, or poor. The term means \"bird-droppings guava\", as khi means waste, nok means bird and farang mean guava (in this setting it means \"a person of the white race\"). It may be also be used toward Thais that acts similar to a Farang.\n\nVarieties of food/produce that were introduced by Europeans are often called \"farang\" varieties. Hence, potatoes are \"man farang\" (), whereas \"man\" () alone can be any tuber; culantro is called \"phak chi farang\" (, literally farang cilantro/coriander); and chewing gum is \"mak farang\" (). \"Mak\" () is Thai for arecanut; chewing \"mak\" together with betel leaves \"(baiphlu)\" was a Thai custom.\n\nIn the Isan Lao dialect, the guava is called \"mak sida\" (), \"mak\" being a prefix for fruit names. Thus \"bak sida\" (), \"bak\" being a prefix when calling males, refers jokingly to a Westerner, by analogy to the Thai language where \"farang\" can mean both guava and Westerner.\n\nIn the Maldives \"faranji\" was the term used to refer to foreigners of European origin, especially the French. Until recently the lane next to the Bastion in the northern shore of Male' was called Faranji Kalō Gōlhi.\n\n"}
{"id": "140904", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=140904", "title": "Bulb of applied force", "text": "Bulb of applied force\n\nIn lithic analysis, a subdivision of archaeology, a bulb of applied force (also known as a bulb of percussion or simply bulb of force) is a defining characteristic of a lithic flake. Bulb of applied force was first correctly described by Sir John Evans, the cofounder of prehistoric archeology. However, bulb of percussion was coined scientifically by W.J. Sollas. When a flake is detached from its parent core, a portion of the Hertzian cone of force caused by the detachment blow is detached with it, leaving a distinctive bulb on the flake and a corresponding flake scar on the core. In the case of a unidirectional core, the bulb of applied force is produced by an initiated crack formed at the point of contact, which begins producing the Hertzian cone. The outward pressure increases causing the crack to curve away from the core and the bulb formation. The bulb of applied force forms below the striking platform as a slight bulge. If the flake is completely crushed the bulb will not be visible. Bulbs of applied force may be distinctive, moderate, or diffuse, depending upon the force of the blow used to detach the flake, and upon the type of material used as a fabricator. The bulb of applied force can indicate the mass or density of the tool used in the application of the force. The bulb may also be an indication of the angle of the force. This information is helpful to archaeologists in understanding and recreating the process of flintknapping. Generally, the harder the material used as a fabricator, the more distinctive the bulb of applied force. Soft hammer percussion has a low diffuse bulb while hard hammer percussion usually leaves a more distinct and noticeable bulb of applied force. Pressure flake also allowed for diffuse bulbs. The bulb of percussion of a flake or blade is convex and the core has a corresponding concave bulb. The concave bulb on the core is known as the negative bulb of percussion. Bulbs of applied force are not usually present if the flake has been struck off naturally. This allows archaeologists to identify and distinguish natural breakage from human artistry. The three main bulb types are flat or nondescript, normal, and pronounced. A flat or nondescript bulb is poorly defined and does not rise up on the ventral surface. A normal bulb on the ventral side has average height and well-defined. A pronounced bulb rises up on ventral side and is very large.\n\nWhen explained visually, the bulb of percussion is visible on the ventral face as opposed to the dorsal face (where it is smoother) and considered to be on the \"inside\" of the parent core. The bulb of percussion is the primary feature that identifies the ventral surface of a flake or blade artifact. Locating its position reveals which is the proximalend of an artifact. Along the proximal end there may be the formation of ripple marks. These ripple marks allow for the direction traveled by the applied force through the lithic when it was detached. Typically, the striking of the flake is produced by knapping (or flintknapping), a process in which requires the user to chip away material from high-silica stones like \"flint\" in a carefully controlled manner with special tools to produce sharp projectile points or tools. A common characteristic that is associated with the bulb of applied force is a bulbar scar. This scar is from a small chip or flake on the bulb. This is known as an eraillure flake scar. It is produced during the initial impact of flake removal. Occasionally, there is more than one contact point on a striking platform which creates a series of superimposed waves. The eraillure flake is a chip removed through contact of a dominant force wave that creates the conchoidal flake and inferior waves. Bulb of applied force is not produced by bipolar technology or wedging initiation.\n\n"}
{"id": "142212", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=142212", "title": "Meringue", "text": "Meringue\n\nMeringue (, ; ) is a type of dessert or candy, often associated with French, Spanish, Swiss, and Italian cuisine, traditionally made from whipped egg whites and sugar, and occasionally an acidic ingredient such as lemon, vinegar, or cream of tartar. A binding agent such as salt, corn starch, or gelatin may also be added to the eggs. The key to the formation of a good meringue is the formation of stiff peaks by denaturing the protein ovalbumin (a protein in the egg whites) via mechanical shear. Meringues are often flavoured with vanilla, a small amount of almond, or coconut, although if extracts of these are used and are based on an oil infusion, an excess of fat from the oil may inhibit the egg whites from forming a foam.\n\nThey are light, airy and sweet confections. Homemade meringues are often chewy and soft with a crisp exterior, while many commercial meringues are crisp throughout. A uniform crisp texture may be achieved at home by baking at a low temperature () for an extended period of up to two hours.\n\nIt has been claimed that meringue was invented in the Swiss village of Meiringen and improved by an Italian chef named Gasparini between the end of the 17th century and the beginning of the 18th century. However, this claim is contested; the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" states that the French word is of unknown origin. It is sure nevertheless that the name \"meringue\" for this confection first appeared in print in François Massialot's cookbook of 1692. The word \"meringue\" first appeared in English in 1706 in an English translation of Massialot's book. Two considerably earlier seventeenth-century English manuscript books of recipes give instructions for confections that are recognizable as meringue, though called \"white biskit bread\" in the book of recipes started in 1604 by Lady Elinor Poole Fettiplace (c.1570 – c.1647) of Gloucestershire and called \"pets\" in the manuscript of collected recipes written by Lady Rachel Fane (1612/13–1680) of Knole, Kent. Slowly baked meringues are still referred to as \"pets\" in the Loire region of France due to their light and fluffy texture.\n\nMeringues were traditionally shaped between two large spoons, as they are generally at home today. Meringue piped through a pastry bag was introduced by Antonin Carême.\n\nThere are several types of meringue: the sweetened, beaten egg whites that form the \"islands\" of floating island (also known in French as \"île flottante\"); the partly cooked toppings of lemon meringue pie and other meringue-topped desserts; and the classic dry featherweight meringue. Different preparation techniques produce these results.\n\nProtein distribution in egg whites is as follows: (54%) ovalbumin, (13%) conalbumin/ ovotransferrin, (11%) ovomucoid, (4%) ovoglobulins, (3.5%) lysozyme, and (2%) ovomucin. Ovoglobulins drive foaming, ovomucin is the main stabilization agent, and the remainder of the proteins interact to contribute to overall foaming and stability. When egg whites are beaten, some of the hydrogen bonds in the proteins break, causing the proteins to unfold (\"denature\") and to aggregate non-specifically. When these egg white proteins denature (due to agitation from beating), their hydrophobic regions are exposed and the formation of intermolecular protein-protein interactions is promoted. These protein-protein interactions, usually disulfide bridges, create networks responsible for the structure of the foam and this change in structure leads to the stiff consistency required for meringues. The use of a copper bowl, or the addition of cream of tartar is required to additionally denature the proteins to create the firm peaks, otherwise the whites will not be firm. Plastic bowls, wet or greasy bowls will likely result in the meringue mix being prevented from becoming peaky. Wiping the bowl with a wedge of lemon to remove any traces of grease can often help the process.\n\nWhen beating egg whites, they are classified in three stages according to the peaks they form when the beater is lifted: soft, firm, and stiff peaks.\n\nEgg whites and sugar are both hygroscopic (water-attracting) chemicals. Consequently, meringue becomes soggy when refrigerated or stored in a high-humidity environment. This quality also explains the problem called \"weeping\" or \"sweating\", in which beads of moisture form on all surfaces of the meringue. Sweating is a particular problem for French meringues in which the granulated sugar is inadequately dissolved in the egg whites, and for high-moisture pie fillings.\n\nThere are three main ingredients in a meringue recipe that interact to form the foam structure, egg whites, sugar, and cream of tartar or acid. The backbone of the foam structure is made up of proteins, amino acid chains. Egg whites provide the meringue with necessary proteins that form the meringue foam. The proteins are originally oriented in a tangled ball but must be uncoiled into strands; this is referred to as denaturation. There are two ways a protein can be denatured, through physical or chemical process. When forming a meringue the egg whites are beat until the proteins are denatured, a physical process. Also by beating the egg whites, air is incorporated into the protein structure creating an air-water protein mixture interface. The friction from beating the eggs adds heat to the process, which causes the proteins to increase in elasticity. As the proteins are being stretched during the denaturation process they are also coagulating together forming a protein network. After the denaturation process the egg whites will become six to eight times their original size. If the proteins are beat for too long they will become stretched out too far and become too weak to support the foam structure.\n\nCream of tartar, also known as potassium hydrogen tartrate, , is added to the egg whites before the denaturation process. Cream of tartar is an acid that is used to help stabilize and coagulate the proteins, which aids in a stronger protein network to trap air for the foam formation. Cream of tartar has a low pH to help bring the proteins near their isoelectric point to allow them to be denatured easier. The isoelectric point is a specific pH where a molecule, in this case protein, has no net electrical charge. The electrical charge on a protein would normally hold the protein together in its coiled clump.\n\nThe cream of tartar also acts as a catalase affecting the sugar structure. Sugar/sucrose used in meringue is a crystal structure made up of glucose and fructose. Cream of tartar inverts the sugar during the baking process, meaning the sugar is split into two parts containing glucose and fructose. This prevents the sugar from recrystallizing and giving the meringue a gritty, undesirable texture.\n\nSugar is the final ingredient that is used to help form and stabilize the foam structure. Sugar is hydrophilic, extracting water out of the egg whites. This will lighten the protein network, allowing the foam to be stronger and more elastic. The sugar dissolves in the protein network but does not become part of the protein network. The sugar must be added slowly to the egg whites, while continuously mixing. If it is added all at once, it will not be evenly distributed, causing the protein network to collapse due to the weight of the sugar in one area of the meringue.\n\nAfter a strong protein network has formed a complete foam, the meringue is ready to be baked. Adding heat to the mixture is the final step to strengthen the foam structure. The meringue must be baked at a low temperature for a long period of time. This allows the proteins to finish coagulating, strengthening the meringue evenly throughout. If the proteins are not baked evenly, the bottom of the meringue will not be able to support the structural weight, causing the meringue to collapse. The heat causes the air bubbles to expand, creating an airier structure. The water in the structure evaporates, causing the meringue to become lighter with a stronger foam structure. It is important to not evaporate all of the water out of the meringue, as some water is necessary to hold the foam together.\n\nMeringues eaten like biscuits are baked at a very low heat for a long time. Another name for them is \"forgotten cookies\", as they can be left in an oven for a long time after the cooking is done. They are not supposed to become tan at all, but they need to be very crisp and dry. They will keep for at least a week if stored in an airtight container.\n\nMeringue can be used as the basis for various desserts including baked Alaska, bruttiboni, dacquoise, Esterházy torte, Eton mess, floating island, key lime pie, Kyiv cake, lemon meringue pie, macarons, merveilleux, pavlova, Queen of Puddings, sans rival, silvana, Spanische Windtorte, and Zuger Kirschtorte. In some recipes, the meringue may be cooked at a higher temperature for a shorter amount of time, resulting in a soft meringue with slightly browned peaks on top.\nAnother dish is \"meringue de angel\", which consists of shortbread biscuits layered with meringue and lemon curd, topped off with drizzled lemon glaze. Variations include assorted fruits such as raspberries, peaches, mangoes, cherries, strawberries, blueberries, blackberries, pineapple, papayas, honeydew, oranges, and cantaloupe.\n\nMeringue may be used for embellishment. It can be formed into whimsical shapes, such as mushrooms, or piped into a crisp basket that is baked and filled with cake, fruit, or flowers.\n\nMeringue is not a stable structure and has a short shelf life of about two weeks if stored properly. Meringue is considered a hygroscopic food, which means it absorbs water from the air. The high sugar concentration in the meringue absorbs moisture from the air and will cause the meringue to become soft and chewy. The more water that is absorbed, the heavier the meringue becomes. After enough water is absorbed, the meringue will become too heavy for the foam structure to support itself, and it will start to collapse. Meringue is so susceptible to absorbing water that a rainy day may disrupt the foam structure formation and make it impossible to form a meringue.\n\nStoring meringues in an airtight container will prevent humidity from affecting the sugar. It is also recommended to store the meringue in a cooler area. If the meringue is stored in these conditions, its shelf life will be about two weeks. To extend the shelf life up to about three months, the meringue can be stored in the freezer. The colder temperatures in the freezer decrease the humidity. The meringue should still be stored in an airtight container, preventing water from affecting the meringue.\n\nThe principal nutritional components are protein from the egg whites and simple carbohydrates from the refined sugar. Because of the sugar, it is not considered a low calorie food.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "142390", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=142390", "title": "Antimatter-catalyzed nuclear pulse propulsion", "text": "Antimatter-catalyzed nuclear pulse propulsion\n\nAntimatter catalyzed nuclear pulse propulsion is a variation of nuclear pulse propulsion based upon the injection of antimatter into a mass of nuclear fuel which normally would not be useful in propulsion. The anti-protons used to start the reaction are consumed, so it is a misnomer to refer to them as a catalyst.\n\nTraditional nuclear pulse propulsion has the downside that the minimum size of the engine is defined by the minimum size of the nuclear bombs used to create thrust. A conventional nuclear H-bomb design consists of two parts, the \"primary\" which is almost always based on plutonium, and a \"secondary\" using fusion fuel, normally lithium-deuteride. There is a minimum size for the primary, about 25 kilograms, which produces a small nuclear explosion about 1/100 kiloton (10 tons, 42 GJ; W54). More powerful devices scale up in size primarily through the addition of fusion fuel. Of the two, the fusion fuel is much less expensive and gives off far fewer radioactive products, so from a cost and efficiency standpoint, larger bombs are much more efficient. However, using such large bombs for spacecraft propulsion demands much larger structures able to handle the stress. There is a tradeoff between the two demands.\n\nBy injecting a small amount of antimatter into a subcritical mass of fuel (typically plutonium or uranium) fission of the fuel can be forced. An anti-proton has a negative electric charge just like an electron, and can be captured in a similar way by a positively charged atomic nucleus. The initial configuration, however, is not stable and radiates energy as gamma rays. As a consequence, the anti-proton moves closer and closer to the nucleus until they eventually touch, at which point the anti-proton and a proton are both annihilated. This reaction releases a tremendous amount of energy, of which, some is released as gamma rays and some is transferred as kinetic energy to the nucleus, causing it to explode. The resulting shower of neutrons can cause the surrounding fuel to undergo rapid fission or even nuclear fusion.\n\nThe lower limit of the device size is determined by anti-proton handling issues and fission reaction requirements; as such, unlike either the Project Orion-type propulsion system, which requires large numbers of nuclear explosive charges, or the various anti-matter drives, which require impossibly expensive amounts of antimatter, antimatter catalyzed nuclear pulse propulsion has intrinsic advantages. \n\nA conceptual design of an antimatter-catalyzed thermonuclear explosive physics package, is one in which the primary mass of plutonium, usually necessary for the ignition in a conventional Teller-Ulam thermonuclear explosion, is replaced by one microgram of antihydrogen. In this theoretical design, the antimatter is helium-cooled and magnetically levitated in the center of the device, in the form of a pellet a tenth of a mm in diameter, a position analogous to the primary fission core in the layer cake/Sloika design). As the antimatter must remain away from ordinary matter until the desired moment of the explosion, the central pellet must be isolated from the surrounding hollow sphere of 100 grams of thermonuclear fuel. During and after the implosive compression by the high explosive lenses, the fusion fuel comes into contact with the antihydrogen. Annihilation reactions, which would start soon after the Penning trap is destroyed, is to provide the energy to begin the nuclear fusion in the thermonuclear fuel. If the chosen degree of compression is high, a device with increased explosive/propulsive effects is obtained, and if it is low, that is, the fuel is not at high density, a considerable number of neutrons will escape the device, and a neutron bomb forms. In both cases the electromagnetic pulse effect and the radioactive fallout are substantially lower than that of a conventional fission or Teller-Ulam device of the same yield, approximately 1 kt.\n\nThe number of antiprotons required for triggering one thermonuclear explosion were calculated in 2005 to be formula_1, which means microgram amounts of antihydrogen.\n\nTuning of the performance of a space vehicle is also possible. Rocket efficiency is strongly related to the mass of the working mass used, which in this case is the nuclear fuel. The energy released by a given mass of fusion fuel is several times larger than that released by the same mass of a fission fuel. For missions requiring short periods of high thrust, such as manned interplanetary missions, pure microfission might be preferred because it reduces the number of fuel elements needed. For missions with longer periods of higher efficiency but with lower thrust, such as outer-planet probes, a combination of microfission and fusion might be preferred because it would reduce the total fuel mass.\n\nThe concept was invented at Pennsylvania State University before 1992. Since then, several groups have studied antimatter-catalyzed micro fission/fusion engines in the lab (sometimes \"antiproton\" as opposed to \"antimatter\" or \"antihydrogen\").\n\nWork has been performed at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory on antiproton-initiated fusion as early as 2004. In contrast to the large mass, complexity and recirculating power of conventional drivers for inertial confinement fusion (ICF), antiproton annihilation offers a specific energy of 90 MJ per µg and thus a unique form of energy packaging and delivery. In principle, antiproton drivers could provide a profound reduction in system mass for advanced space propulsion by ICF.\n\nAntiproton-driven ICF is a speculative concept, and the handling of antiprotons and their required injection precision—temporally and spatially—will present significant technical challenges. The storage and manipulation of low-energy antiprotons, particularly in the form of antihydrogen, is a science in its infancy and a large scale-up of antiproton production over present supply methods would be required to embark on a serious R&D programme for such applications.\n\nThe current (2011) record for antimatter storage is just over 1000 seconds performed in the CERN facility, a monumental leap from the millisecond timescales that previously were achievable.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "143183", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=143183", "title": "Football (ball)", "text": "Football (ball)\n\nA football is a ball inflated with air that is used to play one of the various sports known as football. In these games, with some exceptions, goals or points are scored only when the ball enters one of two designated goal-scoring areas; football games involve the two teams each trying to move the ball in opposite directions along the field of play.\n\nThe first balls were made of natural materials, such as an inflated pig bladder, later put inside a leather cover, which has given rise to the American slang-term \"pigskin\". Modern balls are designed by teams of engineers to exacting specifications, with rubber or plastic bladders, and often with plastic covers. Various leagues and games use different balls, though they all have one of the following basic shapes:\n\nThe precise shape and construction of footballs is typically specified as part of the rules and regulations.\n\nThe oldest football still in existence, which is thought to have been made circa 1550, was discovered in the roof of Stirling Castle, Scotland, in 1981. The ball is made of leather (possibly from a deer) and a pig's bladder. It has a diameter of between , weighs and is currently on display at the Smith Art Gallery and Museum in Stirling.\n\nIn the United States and Canada, the term football usually refers to a ball made of cow hide leather, which is required in professional and collegiate football. Footballs used in recreation and in organized youth leagues may be made of rubber or plastic materials (the high school football rulebooks still allow the inexpensive all-rubber footballs, though they are less common than leather). Since 1941, Horween Leather Company has been the exclusive supplier of leather for National Football League footballs. The arrangement was established by Arnold Horween, who had played and coached in the NFL. Horween Leather Company also supplies leather to Spalding, supplier of balls to the Arena Football League.\n\nLeather panels are typically tanned to a natural brown color, which is usually required in professional leagues and collegiate play. At least one manufacturer uses leather that has been tanned to provide a \"tacky\" grip in dry or wet conditions. Historically, white footballs have been used in games played at night so that the ball can be seen more easily however, improved artificial lighting conditions have made this no longer necessary. At most levels of play (but not, notably, the NFL), white stripes are painted on each end of the ball, halfway around the circumference, to improve nighttime visibility and also to differentiate the college football from the pro football. However, the NFL once explored the usage of white-striped footballs – in Super Bowl VIII.\n\nIn the CFL the stripes traverse the entire circumference of the ball. The UFL used a ball with lime-green stripes. The XFL used a novel color pattern, a black ball with red curved lines in lieu of stripes, for its footballs; this design was redone in a tan and navy color scheme for the Arena Football League in 2003. A ball with red, white and blue panels was introduced in the American Indoor Football League in 2005 and used by its successors, as well as the Ultimate Indoor Football League of the early 2010s and the Can-Am Indoor Football League during its lone season in 2017.\n\nFootballs used in gridiron-style games have prominent points on both ends. The shape is generally credited to official Hugh \"Shorty\" Ray, who introduced the new ball in 1934 as a way to make the forward pass more effective.\n\nLaw 2 of the game specifies that the ball is an air-filled sphere with a circumference of , a weight of , inflated to a pressure of 0.6 to 1.1 atmospheres () \"at sea level\", and covered in leather or \"other suitable material\". The weight specified for a ball is the dry weight, as older balls often became significantly heavier in the course of a match played in wet weather. There are a number of different types of football balls depending on the match and turf including: training footballs, match footballs, professional match footballs, beach footballs, street footballs, indoor footballs, turf balls, futsal footballs and mini/skills footballs.\n\nMost modern Association footballs are stitched from 32 panels of waterproofed leather or plastic: 12 regular pentagons and 20 regular hexagons. The 32-panel configuration is the spherical polyhedron corresponding to the truncated icosahedron; it is spherical because the faces bulge from the pressure of the air inside. The first 32-panel ball was marketed by Select in the 1950s in Denmark. This configuration became common throughout Continental Europe in the 1960s, and was publicised worldwide by the Adidas Telstar, the official ball of the 1970 World Cup. This design in often referenced when describing the truncated icosahedron Archimedean solid, carbon buckyballs, or the root structure of geodesic domes.\n\nThe football used in Australian football is similar to a rugby ball but generally slightly smaller and more rounded at the ends, but more elongated in overall appearance, being longer by comparison with its width than a rugby ball. A regulation football is in circumference, and transverse circumference, and inflated to a pressure of . In the AFL, the balls are red for day matches and yellow for night matches.\n\nThe first games of Australian football were played with a round ball, because balls of that shape were more readily available. In 1860, Australian football pioneer Tom Wills argued that the oval rugby ball travelled further in the air and made for a more exciting game. It became customary in Australian football by the 1870s.\n\nThe Australian football ball was invented by T. W. Sherrin in 1880, after he was given a misshapen rugby ball to fix. Sherrin designed the ball with indented rather than pointy ends to give the ball a better bounce.\n\nAustralian football ball brands include Burley, Ross Faulkner, and Sherrin (the brand used by the Australian Football League).\n\nThe game is played with a round leather football made of 18 stitched leather panels, similar in appearance to a traditional volleyball (but larger), with a circumference of , weighing between when dry. It may be kicked or \"hand passed\". A hand pass is not a punch but rather a strike of the ball with the side of the closed fist, using the knuckle of the thumb.\n\nUntil 1870, rugby was played with a near spherical ball with an inner-tube made of a pig's bladder. In 1870 Richard Lindon and Bernardo Solano started making balls for Rugby school out of hand stitched, four-panel, leather casings and pigs’ bladders. The rugby ball's distinctive shape is supposedly due to the pig’s bladder, although early balls were more plum-shape than oval. The balls varied in size in the beginning depending upon how large the pig’s bladder was. Because of the pliability of rubber the shape gradually changed from a sphere to an egg. In 1892 the RFU endorsed ovalness as the compulsory shape. The gradual flattening of the ball continued over the years.\nThe introduction of synthetic footballs over the traditional leather balls, in both rugby codes, was originally governed by weather conditions. If the playing surface was wet, the synthetic ball was used, because it wouldn't absorb water and become heavy. Eventually, the leather balls were phased out completely.\n\nRugby league is played with a prolate spheroid shaped football which is inflated with air. A referee will stop play immediately if the ball does not meet the requirements of size and shape. Traditionally made of brown leather, modern footballs are synthetic and manufactured in a variety of colours and patterns. Senior competitions should use light-coloured balls to allow spectators to see the ball more easily. The football used in rugby league is known as \"international size\" or \"size 5\" and is approximately long and in circumference at its widest point. Smaller-sized balls are used for junior versions of the game, such as \"Mini\" and \"Mod\". A full size ball weighs between . Rugby league footballs are slightly more pointed than rugby union footballs and larger than American footballs.\n\nThe Australasian National Rugby League and Super League use balls made by Steeden. Steeden is also sometimes used in Australia as a noun to describe the ball itself.\n\nThe ball used in rugby union, usually referred to as a rugby ball, is a prolate spheroid essentially elliptical in profile. Traditionally made of brown leather, modern footballs are manufactured in a variety of colours and patterns. A regulation football is long and in circumference at its widest point. It weighs and is inflated to .\n\nIn 1980, leather-encased balls, which were prone to water-logging, were replaced with balls encased in synthetic waterproof materials. The Gilbert Synergie was the match ball of the 2007 Rugby World Cup.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "144585", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=144585", "title": "Frith", "text": "Frith\n\nFrith is an Old English word meaning \"peace; protection; safety, security\". \n\nDerived from Old English \"friðu, friþ\", it is cognate to Old Norse \"friðr\", Old High German \"fridu\", German \"Friede\", Dutch \"vrede\", West Frisian \"frede\", Icelandic \"friður\", Common Scandinavian \"fred\" (all with meanings similar to \"peace\" or \"calm\") and also root-cognate to \"friend\".\n\nIn Swedish, two different words with different meanings have developed from this word, the words \"fred\" (state of no war) and \"frid\" (state of no disturbance) and also the expression that something is \"fredat/fredad\" more or less \"peaced\" denoting things that are not to be touched such as animals not to be hunted or flowers not to be picked. The English word became obsolete in the Middle English period, but survived into the 17th century in the compound \"frith-silver\" \"feudal payment\".\n\nIn terms of Anglo-Saxon and post-Anglo-Saxon culture, the term has a considerably broader scope and meaning. \"Frith\" has a great deal to do not only with the state of peace but also with the nature of social relationships conducive to peace. Moreover, it has strong associations with stability and security. \n\nThe word \"friþgeard\" meaning \"asylum, sanctuary\" was used for sacrosanct areas. A \"friþgeard\" would then be any enclosed area given over to the worship of the gods. Seating oneself on a \"frith-stool\" was sometimes a requirement for claiming sanctuary in certain English churches.\n\n\"Frith\" is also used in the context of fealty, as an expression of the relationship between a lord and his people.\n\n\"Frith\" is inextricably related to the state of kinship, which is perhaps the strongest indicator of \"frith\". In this respect, the word can be coterminous with another significant Anglo-Saxon root-word, \"sib\" (from which the word 'sibling' is derived) - indeed the two are frequently interchanged. In this context, \"frith\" goes further than expressing blood ties, and encompasses all the concomitant benefits and duties which kinship engenders. \n\n\"Frith\" also has a legal significance: peace was effectively maintained in Anglo-Saxon times by the \"frith\"-guild, an early manifestation of summary justice.\n\nIn the post-Conquest poem \"Rime of King William\", a \"deorfrið\" (literally animal-\"frith\") referred to one of the royal forests set up by William the Conqueror, probably the New Forest in particular. Stefan Jurasinski argued that \"frið\" here could have carried the legal notion of protection (Latin: \"pax\").\n\n\n"}
{"id": "144756", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=144756", "title": "Succotash", "text": "Succotash\n\nSuccotash (from Narragansett \"sohquttahhash\", \"broken corn kernels\") is a culinary dish consisting primarily of sweet corn with lima beans or other shell beans. Other ingredients may be added including tomatoes, green or sweet red peppers, and okra. Combining a grain with a legume provides a dish that is high in all essential amino acids. Because of the relatively inexpensive and more readily available ingredients, the dish was popular during the Great Depression in the United States. It was sometimes cooked in a casserole form, often with a light pie crust on top as in a traditional pot pie. Succotash is a traditional dish of many Thanksgiving celebrations in New England as well as in Pennsylvania and other states. In some parts of the American South, any mixture of vegetables prepared with lima beans and topped with lard or butter is called succotash. Corn (maize), American beans, tomatoes, and peppers are New World foods.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "145232", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=145232", "title": "Marmalade", "text": "Marmalade\n\nMarmalade generally refers to a fruit preserve made from the juice and peel of citrus fruits boiled with sugar and water. It can be produced from kumquats, lemons, limes, grapefruits, mandarins, sweet oranges, bergamots, and other citrus fruits, or any combination of them, even though the original Portuguese marmalade is produced only from quince. \n\nFor many decades now, the preferred citrus fruit for marmalade production in the British Isles has been the Spanish Seville orange, \"Citrus aurantium\" var. \"aurantium\", prized for its high pectin content, which sets readily to the thick consistency expected of marmalade. The peel imparts a bitter taste.\n\nThe term \"marmalade\" is a translation of the Portuguese marmelada that originated from the word marmelo (English: quince) .\n\nUnless otherwise stated, marmalade is generally distinguished from jam by its fruit peel. However, it also may be distinguished from jam by the choice of fruit. Historically, the term was more often used in senses other than just citrus conserves.\n\nThe Romans learned from the Greeks that quinces slowly cooked with honey would \"set\" when cool (though they did not know about fruit pectin). Greek (', \"honey fruit\") transformed into Portuguese '— from the Greek (', \"apple\") stood for all globular fruits, and most quinces are too astringent to be used without honey. A Roman cookbook attributed to Apicius gives a recipe for preserving whole quinces, stems and leaves attached, in a bath of honey diluted with defrutum—Roman marmalade. Preserves of quince and lemon appear—along with rose, apple, plum and pear—in the \"Book of ceremonies\" of the Byzantine Emperor Constantine VII ', \"a book that is not only a treatise on the etiquette of imperial banquetting in the ninth century, but a catalogue of the foods available and dishes made from them.\"\n\nMedieval quince preserves, which went by the French name ', produced in a clear version and a fruit pulp version, began to lose their medieval seasoning of spices in the 16th century. In the 17th century, La Varenne provided recipes for both thick and clear '.\n\nIn 1524, Henry VIII received a \"box of marmalade\" from Mr Hull of Exeter. As it was in a box, this was probably \"\", a solid quince paste from Portugal, still made and sold in southern Europe. Its Portuguese origins can be detected in the remarks in letters to Lord Lisle, from William Grett, 12 May 1534, \"I have sent to your lordship a box of marmaladoo, and another unto my good lady your wife\" and from Richard Lee, 14 December 1536, \"He most heartily thanketh her Ladyship for her marmalado\".\n\nThe English recipe book of Eliza Cholmondeley, dated from 1677 and held at the Chester Record Office in the Cheshire county archivists, has one of the earliest marmalade recipes (\"Marmelet of Oranges\") which produced a firm, thick dark paste. The Scots are credited with developing marmalade as a spread, with Scottish recipes in the 18th century using more water to produce a less solid preserve.\n\nThe first printed recipe for orange marmalade, though without the chunks typically used now, was in Mary Kettilby's 1714 cookery book, \"A Collection of above Three Hundred Receipts\" (pages 78–79). Kettilby called for whole oranges, lemon juice and sugar, with the acid in the lemon juice helping to create the pectin set of marmalade, by boiling the lemon and orange juice with the pulp. Kettilby then directs: \"boil the whole pretty fast 'till it will jelly\" – the first known use of the word \"jelly\" in marmalade making. Kettilby then instructs that the mixture is then poured into glasses, covered and left until set. As the acid would create a jelly, this meant that the mixture could be pulled from the heat before it had turned to a paste, keeping the marmalade much brighter and the appearance more translucent, as in modern-day marmalade.\n\nThe Scots moved marmalade to the breakfast table, and in the 19th century the English followed the Scottish example and abandoned the eating of marmalade in the evening. Marmalade's place in British life appears in literature. James Boswell remarks that he and Samuel Johnson were offered it at breakfast in Scotland in 1773. When American writer Louisa May Alcott visited Britain in the 1800s, she described \"a choice pot of marmalade and a slice of cold ham\" as \"essentials of English table comfort\".\n\nAccording to the \"Oxford English Dictionary\", \"marmalade\" appeared in the English language in 1480, borrowed from French \"marmelade\" which, in turn, came from the Galician-Portuguese word \"marmelada\". According to José Pedro Machado’s \"Dicionário Etimológico da Língua Portuguesa\", the oldest known document where this Portuguese word is to be found is Gil Vicente’s play \"Comédia de Rubena\", written in 1521:\n\nThe extension of \"marmalade\" in the English language to refer to a preserve made from citrus fruits occurred in the 17th century, when citrus first began to be plentiful enough in England for the usage to become common.\n\nIn Portuguese, according to the root of the word, which is ', \"quince\", ' is a preserve made from quinces, quince cheese. \"\" in turn derives from Latin \"melimelum\", \"honey apple\", which in turn comes from the earlier Greek \"μελίμηλον\" (\"melímēlon\"), from \"μέλι\" (\"meli\"), \"honey\" + \"μήλον\" (\"mēlon\"), \"apple\".\n\nThere is an apocryphal story that Mary, Queen of Scots, ate it when she had a headache, and that the name is derived from her maids' whisper of \"\" (Mary is ill). In reality, the word's origin has nothing to do with Mary.\n\nIn much of Europe and Latin America, cognates for the English term \"marmalade\" are still used as a generic term for preserves of all fruits, whereas in Britain it refers solely to a citrus preserve. The name originates in Portuguese, where ' applies exclusively to quince jam. In Spanish the term usually refers to what in English is called jam, and ' — used in Mexico and Central America — is similar to the American English jelly.\n\nUnder the Food and Drug Regulations (C.R.C., c. 870), marmalade strictly requires sweetening ingredient that must be at least 65% water soluble solids. Marmalade can also contain some acid chemical that can balance the natural acidity within citrus fruit, a pH adjusting agent and an antifoaming agent.\nMarmalade with pectin must have at least 27% ingredients of citrus fruit components and at least 65% water soluble solids and pectin. It optionally contains class II preservatives (examples include benzoates, sorbates, nitrites), a pH adjusting agent, and an antifoaming agent.\n\nSince 1979, the EU directive 79/693/CEE define marmalade as a jam made from citrus fruits. The directive was replaced on 20/12/2001 by the ruling 32001L0113.\n\nThe Scottish city of Dundee has a long association with marmalade. James Keiller and his wife Janet ran a small sweet and preserves shop in the Seagate area of Dundee. In 1797, they opened a factory to produce \"Dundee Marmalade\", a preserve distinguished by thick chunks of bitter Seville orange rind. The business prospered, and remains a signature marmalade producer today.\n\nAccording to a Scottish legend, the creation of orange marmalade in Britain occurred by accident. The legend tells of a ship carrying a cargo of oranges that broke down in the port of Dundee, resulting in some ingenious locals making marmalade out of the cargo.\n\nPaddington Bear, a fictional character in children's literature, is renowned for his liking for marmalade, particularly in sandwiches, and kept it in his briefcase wherever he went.. Paddington Bear is now used on the label of the smaller peel (\"shred\") and clearer/milder Robertson's 'Golden Shred' marmalade.The previous icon - the famous and historical Robertson's \"Golliwog\" image on the label being now considered racially offensive - supplanted. The 2014 movie Paddington led to a slight increase in marmalade sales in the UK.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "146965", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=146965", "title": "Raffaello (confection)", "text": "Raffaello (confection)\n\nRaffaello is a spherical coconut-almond confection that Italian manufacturer Ferrero brought to the market in 1990. The total almond content accounts for 8% of the weight, and the total coconut content is 23.5%.\n\nThe praline comprises a spherical wafer which is filled with a white milk cream and white blanched almonds. It is surrounded by a coconut layer. Raffaello contains no chocolate, but does contain lactose, making Raffaello incompatible for consumers with lactose intolerance. However, almonds instead of hazelnuts are included, which is relevant for those allergic to hazelnuts.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "147721", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=147721", "title": "Nabemono", "text": "Nabemono\n\nNabemono (鍋物, なべ物, \"nabe\" \"cooking pot\" + \"mono\" \"thing or things, object, matter\"), or simply nabe, is a variety of Japanese hot pot dishes, also known as \"one pot dishes\" and \"things in a pot.\"\n\nMost nabemono are stews and soups served during the colder seasons. In modern Japan, nabemono are kept hot at the dining table by portable stoves. The dish is frequently cooked at the table, and the diners can pick the cooked ingredients they want from the pot. It is either eaten with the broth or with a dip. Further ingredients can also be successively added to the pot.\n\nThere are two types of nabemono in Japan: lightly flavored stock (mostly with kombu) types such as \"yudōfu\" (湯豆腐) and \"mizutaki\" (水炊き), eaten with a dipping sauce (\"tare\") to enjoy the taste of the ingredients themselves; and strongly flavored stock, typically with miso, soy sauce, dashi, and/or sweet soy types such as \"yosenabe\" (寄鍋), \"oden\" (おでん), and \"sukiyaki\" (すき焼き), eaten without further flavoring.\n\nThe pots are traditionally made of clay (土鍋, \"donabe\") or thick cast iron (鉄鍋, \"tetsunabe\"). Clay pots can keep warm for a while after being taken off the fire, while cast iron pots evenly distribute heat and are preferable for \"sukiyaki\". Pots are usually placed in the center of dining tables and are shared by multiple people. This is considered the most sociable way to eat with friends and family.\n\n\nThere are wide varieties of regional nabemono in Japan, which contain regional specialty foods such as salmon in Hokkaidō and oyster in Hiroshima. Here are a few examples:\n\n\nNabemono are usually eaten with a sauce sometimes called \"tare\", literally \"dipping\". Several kinds of sauce can be used with additional spices, called yakumi. Typical yakumi include grated garlic, butter, red pepper, a mixture of red pepper and other spices, roasted sesame, or \"momiji oroshi\" (a mixture of grated daikon radish and red pepper).\n\n"}
{"id": "147723", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=147723", "title": "Miso soup", "text": "Miso soup\n\nMiso soup is one of the two basic soup types of Japanese cuisine – the other one is suimono (clear soup).\n\nThe choice of miso paste for the miso soup defines a great deal of its character and flavor. Miso pastes (a traditional Japanese seasoning produced by fermenting soybeans with salt and the fungus \"Aspergillus oryzae\", known in Japanese as kōjikin (麹菌), and sometimes rice, barley, or other ingredients) can be categorized into red (\"akamiso\"), white (\"shiromiso\"), or mixed (\"awase\"). There are many variations within these themes, including regional variations, such as Shinshū miso or Sendai miso.\n\nA miso paste that has been fermented for a longer period of time, such as a red miso, gives the miso soup a stronger, deeper flavor. A miso paste that has been fermented for a shorter period of time, such as a white miso, provides a lighter, sweeter flavor.\n\nMore than 80% of Japan's total annual production of miso goes into miso soup, and 75% of all Japanese people consume miso soup at least once a day.\n\nThe most common \"dashi\" soup stocks for miso soup are made of niboshi (dried baby sardines), kombu (dried kelp), katsuobushi (thin shavings of dried and smoked bonito, aka skipjack tuna), or hoshi-shiitake (dried shiitake). The kombu can also be used in combination with katsuobushi or hoshi-shiitake. The kelp and/or shiitake dashi serve as a vegetarian soup stock.\n\nOutside Japan, American or European style miso soup is sometimes made by dissolving miso in a Western vegetable stock. The stock might include ingredients such as \"negi\", carrot, potato and \"daikon\" radish. In some versions of the dish, chicken stock, Western-style fish stock, and other non-\"dashi\" bases can even be used, but there is some debate over whether or not miso soups made using these non-traditional bases count as true \"misoshiru\". Christian Japanese refugees who came to the Philippines during the Edo period brought along miso soup.\n\nAccording to Japanese custom, the solid ingredients are chosen to reflect the seasons and to provide contrasts of color, texture, and flavor. Thus negi and tofu, a strongly flavored ingredient mixed with a delicately flavored ingredient, are often combined. Ingredients that float, such as wakame seaweed, and ingredients that sink, such as potatoes, are also combined. Ingredients may include mushrooms, potatoes, seaweed, onion, shrimp, fish, clams, and sliced daikon. Nearly any Japanese ingredient is added to some type of \"misoshiru\". However, \"misoshiru\" does not typically contain many ingredients beyond the stock and miso.\n\nIf pork is added to miso soup, it is called \"tonjiru\", meaning \"pork soup\".\n\nMiso soup can be prepared in several ways, depending on the chef and the style of soup. Japanese recipes usually call for most vegetables and meats to be cooked in the simmering \"dashi\", particularly mushrooms, daikon, carrots, potatoes, tofu, and fish. The miso is suspended separately in some dashi stock removed from the simmering mix, to keep the miso paste from cooking, which alters the flavour, kills beneficial bacteria, and reduces the health benefits of biologically active miso paste. When the vegetables are cooked, the stock is removed from heat, the miso suspension is added and mixed into the soup, any uncooked ingredients are added, and the dish is served.\n\nIn Japan, miso soup and white rice make up the central dishes of the traditional Japanese breakfast. The soup has been a favorite of commoners and royalty alike for many centuries, but there are also many other dishes involving breakfast. They are all quite small, some include egg, fish, and nattō which is a fermented soy bean. The soup is usually served in lacquer bowls with lids and drunk directly from the bowl, though the solid ingredients are eaten with chopsticks. The bowl sometimes has a lid to keep heat and aroma in as well as to improve the presentation.\n\nInstant miso soup is available in single-serving packets. It is usually sold in dehydrated powder and paste forms, though it sometimes also sold freeze dried. It generally contains dried toppings such as wakame and tofu with soy beans that reconstitute rapidly on the addition of hot water. These are popular in the Japanese workplace, where miso soup can be made with lunch as easily as green tea and using the same water. Instant miso soup is available in many grocery stores outside Japan. It has a shelf life of 3 to 12 months.\n\n\"Wappani\" ( is a miso-soup-based dish unique to Awashima island off the coast of Niigata, Japan. A cedar flask (\"\"wappa\"\") is filled with miso soup, fish and vegetables and it is heated by dropping in hot rocks, which quickly bring it to a simmer. Hot rocks retain their heat for hours after being taken from the fire, so a hot meal can be prepared without the use of fire.\n\nIn 2003, researchers at Japan's National Cancer Centre suggested that \"eating three or more bowls of the Japanese delicacy Miso soup every day could cut women's risk of developing breast cancer\". Miso soup also tends to be low in calories, but is filling because of the high protein content.\n\n"}
{"id": "147735", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=147735", "title": "Toothpaste", "text": "Toothpaste\n\nToothpaste is a paste or gel dentifrice used with a toothbrush to clean and maintain the aesthetics and health of teeth. Toothpaste is used to promote oral hygiene: it is an abrasive that aids in removing dental plaque and food from the teeth, assists in suppressing halitosis, and delivers active ingredients (most commonly fluoride) to help prevent tooth decay (dental caries) and gum disease (gingivitis). Salt and sodium bicarbonate (baking soda) are among materials that can be substituted for commercial toothpaste. Large amounts of swallowed toothpaste can be toxic.\n\nA 2016 systematic review indicates that using toothpaste when brushing the teeth has no impact on the level of plaque removal.\nIn addition to 20%–42% water, toothpastes are derived from a variety of components, the three main ones being abrasives, fluoride, and detergents.\n\nAbrasives constitute at least 50% of a typical toothpaste. These insoluble particles are designed to help remove plaque from the teeth. The removal of plaque and calculus prevents the accumulation of tartar and is widely claimed to help minimize cavities and periodontal disease, although the clinical significance of this benefit is debated. Representative abrasives include particles of aluminum hydroxide (Al(OH)), calcium carbonate (CaCO), various calcium hydrogen phosphates, various silicas and zeolites, and hydroxyapatite (Ca(PO)OH).\n\nAbrasives, like the dental polishing agents used in dentists' offices, also cause a small amount of enamel erosion which is termed \"polishing\" action. Some brands contain powdered white mica, which acts as a mild abrasive, and also adds a cosmetically pleasing glittery shimmer to the paste. The polishing of teeth removes stains from tooth surfaces, but has not been shown to improve dental health over and above the effects of the removal of plaque and calculus.\n\nThe abrasive effect of toothpaste is indicated by its RDA value. Too high RDA values are deleterious. Some dentists recommend toothpaste with an RDA value no higher than 50 for daily use.\n\nFluoride in various forms is the most popular active ingredient in toothpaste to prevent cavities. Fluoride is present in small amounts in plants, animals, and some natural water sources. The additional fluoride in toothpaste has beneficial effects on the formation of dental enamel and bones. Sodium fluoride (NaF) is the most common source of fluoride, but stannous fluoride (SnF), olaflur (an organic salt of fluoride), and sodium monofluorophosphate (NaPOF) are also used. Stannous fluoride has been shown to be more effective than sodium fluoride in reducing the incidence of dental caries and controlling gingivitis, but causes somewhat more surface stains.\n\nMuch of the toothpaste sold in the United States has 1,000 to 1,100 parts per million fluoride. In European countries, such as the UK or Greece, the fluoride content is often higher; a NaF content of 0.312% w/w (1,450 ppm fluoride) is common. All of these concentrations are likely to prevent tooth decay, according to a 2010 Cochrane review. Concentrations below 1,000 ppm are not likely to be preventive, and the preventive effect increases with concentration. Clinical trials support the use of high fluoride dentifrices, as it was found to reduce the amount of plaque accumulated, decrease the number of mutans streptococci and lactobacilli and possibly promote calcium fluoride deposits to a higher degree than after the use of traditional fluoride containing dentifrices. However, these effects must be balanced with the increased risk of harm at higher concentrations.\n\nMany, although not all, toothpastes contain sodium lauryl sulfate (SLS) or related surfactants (detergents). SLS is found in many other personal care products as well, such as shampoo, and is mainly a foaming agent, which enables uniform distribution of toothpaste, improving its cleansing power.\n\nTriclosan, an antibacterial agent, is a common toothpaste ingredient in the United Kingdom. Triclosan or zinc chloride prevent gingivitis and, according to the American Dental Association, helps reduce tartar and bad breath. A 2006 review of clinical research concluded there was evidence for the effectiveness of 0.30% triclosan in reducing plaque and gingivitis. Another Cochrane review in 2013 has found that triclosan achieved a 22% reduction in plaque, and in gingivitis, a 48% reduction in bleeding gums. However, there was insufficient evidence to show a difference in fighting periodontitis and there was no evidence either of any harmful effects associated with the use of triclosan toothpastes for more than 3 years. The evidence relating to plaque and gingivitis was considered to be of moderate quality while for periodontitis was low quality.\n\nToothpaste comes in a variety of colors and flavors, intended to encourage use of the product. The three most common flavorants are peppermint, spearmint, and wintergreen. Toothpaste flavored with peppermint-anise oil is popular in the Mediterranean region. These flavors are provided by the respective oils, e.g. peppermint oil. More exotic flavors include Anethole anise, apricot, bubblegum, cinnamon, fennel, lavender, neem, ginger, vanilla, lemon, orange, and pine. Alternatively, unflavored toothpastes exist.\n\nHydroxyapatite nanocrystals and a variety of calcium phosphates are included in formulations for remineralization, i.e. the reformation of enamel.\nAgents are added to suppress the tendency of toothpaste to dry into a powder. Included are various sugar alcohols, such as glycerol, sorbitol, or xylitol, or related derivatives, such as 1,2-propylene glycol and polyethyleneglycol. Strontium chloride or potassium nitrate is included in some toothpastes to reduce sensitivity. Two systemic meta-analysis reviews reported that arginine, and calcium sodium phosphosilicate - CSPS containing toothpastes are also effective in alleviating dentinal hypersensitivity respectively. Another randomized clinical trial found superior effects when both formulas were combined together.\n\nSodium polyphosphate is added to minimize the formation of tartar. Other example to components in toothpastes is the Biotene, which has proved its efficiency in relieving the symptoms of dry mouth in people who suffer from xerostomia according to the results of two randomized clinical trials.\n\nChlorohexidine mouthwash has been popular for its positive effect on controlling plaque and gingivitis, however, a systemic review studied the effects of chlorohexidine toothpastes and found insufficient evidence to support its use, tooth surface discoloration was observed as a side effect upon using it, which is considered a negative side effect that can affect patients' compliance.\n\nSodium hydroxide, also known as lye or caustic soda, is listed as an inactive ingredient in some toothpaste, for example Colgate Total.\n\nSome studies have demonstrated that toothpastes with xylitol as an ingredient are more effective at preventing dental caries in permanent of children teeth than toothpastes containing fluoride alone. Furthermore, xylitol has not been found to cause any harmful effects. Further investigation into the efficacy of toothpastes containing this product is however required as the currently available studies are of low quality and therefore the results of such studies must be applied carefully.\n\nFluoride-containing toothpaste can be acutely toxic if swallowed in large amounts, however instances are exceedingly rare and result from prolonged and excessive use of toothpaste (i.e. several tubes per week). Approximately 15 mg/kg body weight is the acute lethal dose, even though as small amount as 5 mg/kg may be fatal to some children.\n\nThe risk of using fluoride is low enough that the use of full-strength toothpaste (1350–1500 ppm fluoride) is advised for all ages. However, smaller volumes are used for young children, for example, a smear of toothpaste until three years old. A major concern of dental fluorosis is for children under 12 months ingesting excessive fluoride through toothpaste. Nausea and vomiting are also problems which might arise with topical fluoride ingestion.\n\nThe inclusion of sweet-tasting but toxic diethylene glycol in Chinese-made toothpaste led to a recall in 2007 involving multiple toothpaste brands in several nations. The world outcry made Chinese officials ban the practice of using diethylene glycol in toothpaste.\n\nReports have suggested triclosan, an active ingredient in many kinds of toothpastes, can combine with chlorine in tap water to form chloroform, which the United States Environmental Protection Agency classifies as a probable human carcinogen. An animal study revealed the chemical might modify hormone regulation, and many other lab researches proved bacteria might be able to develop resistance to triclosan in a way which can help them to resist antibiotics also.\n\nPEG is a common ingredient in some of the formulas of toothpastes; it is a hydrophilic polymer that acts as a dispersant in toothpastes. Also, it is used in many cosmetic and pharmaceutical formulas, for example: ointments, osmotic laxatives, some of the non steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, other medications and household products. However, 37 cases of PEG hypersensitivity (delayed and immediate) to PEG-containing substances have been reported since 1977, suggesting that they have unrecognized allergenic potential.\n\nWith the exception of toothpaste intended to be used on pets such as dogs and cats, and toothpaste used by astronauts, most toothpaste is not intended to be swallowed, and doing so may cause nausea or diarrhea. Tartar fighting toothpastes have been debated. Case reports of plasma cell gingivitis have been reported with the use of herbal toothpaste containing cinnamon. Sodium lauryl sulfate (SLS) has been proposed to increase the frequency of mouth ulcers in some people, as it can dry out the protective layer of oral tissues, causing the underlying tissues to become damaged. In studies conducted by the university of Oslo on recurrent aphthous ulcers, it was found that SLS has a denaturing effect on the oral mucin layer, with high affinity for proteins, thereby increasing epithelial permeability. In a double-blind cross-over study, a significantly higher frequency of aphthous ulcers was demonstrated when patients brushed with an SLS-containing versus a detergent-free toothpaste. Also patients with Oral Lichen Planus who avoided SLS-containing toothpaste benefited.\n\nAfter using toothpaste, orange juice and other juices have an unpleasant taste. Sodium lauryl sulfate alters taste perception. It can break down phospholipids that inhibit taste receptors for sweetness, giving food a bitter taste. In contrast, apples are known to taste more pleasant after using toothpaste. Distinguishing between the hypotheses that the bitter taste of orange juice results from stannous fluoride or from sodium lauryl sulfate is still an unresolved issue and it is thought that the menthol added for flavor may also take part in the alteration of taste perception when binding to lingual cold receptors.\n\nMany toothpastes make whitening claims. Some of these toothpastes contain peroxide, the same ingredient found in tooth bleaching gels. The abrasive in these toothpastes, not the peroxide, removes the stains. Whitening toothpaste cannot alter the natural color of teeth or reverse discoloration by penetrating surface stains or decay. To remove surface stains, whitening toothpaste may include abrasives to gently polish the teeth or additives such as sodium tripolyphosphate to break down or dissolve stains. When used twice a day, whitening toothpaste typically takes two to four weeks to make teeth appear whiter. Whitening toothpaste is generally safe for daily use, but excessive use might damage tooth enamel. Teeth whitening gels represent an alternative. A recent systematic review in 2017 concluded that nearly all dentifrices that are specifically formulated for tooth whitening were shown to have a beneficial effect in reducing extrinsic stains, irrespective of whether or not a chemical discoloration agent was added. However, the whitening process can permanently reduce the strength of the teeth, as the process scrapes away a protective outer layer of enamel.\n\nCompanies such as Tom's of Maine, among others, manufacture natural and herbal toothpastes and market them to consumers who wish to avoid the artificial ingredients commonly found in regular toothpastes. Many herbal toothpastes do not contain fluoride or sodium lauryl sulfate. The ingredients found in natural toothpastes vary widely but often include baking soda, aloe, eucalyptus oil, myrrh, plant extract (strawberry extract), and essential oils. A systemic review in 2014 found insufficient evidence to determine whether the aloe vera herbal dentifrice can reduce plaque or improve gingival health, as the randomized studies were found to be flawed with high risk of bias.\n\nAccording to a study by the Delhi Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences and Research, many of the herbal toothpastes being sold in India were adulterated with nicotine.\n\nCharcoal has also been incorporated in toothpaste formulas; however, there is no evidence to determine its safety and effectiveness.\n\nStriped toothpaste was invented by Leonard Marraffino in 1955. The patent (US patent , issued 1957) was subsequently sold to Unilever, who marketed the novelty under the Stripe brand-name in the early 1960s. This was followed by the introduction of the Signal brand in Europe in 1965 (UK patent 813,514). Although Stripe was initially very successful, it never again achieved the 8% market share that it cornered during its second year.\n\nMarraffino's design, which remains in use for single-color stripes, is simple. The main material, usually white, sits at the crimp end of the toothpaste tube and makes up most of its bulk. A thin pipe, through which that carrier material will flow, descends from the nozzle to it. The stripe-material (this was red in Stripe) fills the gap between the carrier material and the top of the tube. The two materials are not in separate compartments, however, they are sufficiently viscous that they will not mix. When pressure is applied to the toothpaste tube, the main material squeezes down the thin pipe to the nozzle. Simultaneously, the pressure applied to the main material causes pressure to be forwarded to the stripe material, which thereby issues out through small holes (in the side of the pipe) onto the main carrier material as it is passing those holes.\n\nIn 1990, Colgate-Palmolive was granted a patent (USPTO ) for two differently colored stripes. In this scheme, the inner pipe has a cone-shaped plastic guard around it, and about halfway up its length. Between the guard and the nozzle-end of the tube is a space for the material for one color, which issues out of holes in the pipe. On the other side of the guard is space for second stripe-material, which has its own set of holes.\n\nStriped toothpaste should not be confused with layered toothpaste. Layered toothpaste requires a multi-chamber design (e.g. USPTO ), in which two or three layers extrude out of the nozzle. This scheme, like that of pump dispensers (USPTO ), is more complicated (and thus, more expensive to manufacture) than either the Marraffino design or the Colgate design.\n\nSince 5000 BC, the Egyptians made a tooth powder, which consisted of powdered ashes of ox hooves, myrrh, powdered and burnt eggshells, and pumice. The Greeks, and then the Romans, improved the recipes by adding abrasives such as crushed bones and oyster shells. In the 9th century, Iraqi musician and fashion designer Ziryab invented a type of toothpaste, which he popularized throughout Islamic Spain. The exact ingredients of this toothpaste are unknown, but it was reported to have been both \"functional and pleasant to taste\". It is not known whether these early toothpastes were used alone, were to be rubbed onto the teeth with rags, or were to be used with early toothbrushes, such as neem-tree twigs and \"miswak\". During Japan's Edo period, inventor Hiraga Gennai's \"Hika rakuyo\" (1769), contained advertisements for \"Sosekiko\", a \"toothpaste in a box.\" Toothpastes or powders came into general use in the 19th century.\n\nTooth powders for use with toothbrushes came into general use in the 19th century in Britain. Most were homemade, with chalk, pulverized brick, or salt as ingredients. An 1866 Home Encyclopedia recommended pulverized charcoal, and cautioned that many patented tooth powders that were commercially marketed did more harm than good.\n\nArm & Hammer marketed a baking soda-based toothpowder in the United States until approximately 2000, and Colgate currently markets toothpowder in India and other countries.\n\nAn 18th-century American and British toothpaste recipe called for burned bread. Another formula around this time called for dragon's blood (a resin), cinnamon, and burned alum.\n\nBy 1900, a paste made of hydrogen peroxide and baking soda was recommended for use with toothbrushes. Pre-mixed toothpastes were first marketed in the 19th century, but did not surpass the popularity of tooth-powder until World War I. \n\nTogether with Willoughby D. Miller, Newell Sill Jenkins developed a toothpaste and named it Kolynos, the first toothpaste containing disinfectants. The name's origin is from Greek \"Kolyo nosos\" (κωλύω νόσος), meaning \"disease prevention\". Numerous attempts to produce the toothpaste by pharmacists in Europe have been uneconomic. After returning to the US, he continued experimenting with Harry Ward Foote (1875-1942), professor of chemistry at Sheffield Chemical Laboratory of Yale University. After 17 years of development of Kolynos and clinical trials, Jenkins retired and transferred the production and distribution to his son Leonard A. Jenkins, who brought the first toothpaste tubes on the market on April 13, 1908. Within a few years the company expanded in North America, Latin America, Europe and the Far East. A branch operation opened in London in 1909. In 1937, Kolynos was produced in 22 countries and sold in 88 countries. Kolynos has been sold mainly in South America and in Hungary. Colgate-Palmolive took over the production of American Home Products in 1995 at a cost of one billion US dollars.\n\nFluoride was first added to toothpastes in the 1890s. Tanagra, containing calcium fluoride as the active ingredient, was sold by Karl F. Toellner Company, of Bremen, Germany, based upon the early work of chemist Albert Deninger. An analogous invention by Roy Cross, of Kansas City, Missouri, was initially criticized by the American Dental Association (ADA) in 1937. Fluoride toothpastes developed in the 1950s received the ADA's approval. To develop the first ADA-approved fluoride toothpaste, Procter & Gamble started a research program in the early 1940s. In 1950, Procter & Gamble developed a joint research project team headed by Dr. Joseph Muhler at Indiana University to study new toothpaste with fluoride. In 1955, Procter & Gamble's Crest launched its first clinically proven fluoride-containing toothpaste. On August 1, 1960, the ADA reported that \"Crest has been shown to be an effective anticavity (decay preventative) dentifrice that can be of significant value when used in a conscientiously applied program of oral hygiene and regular professional care.\"\n\nIn 1980, the Japanese company, Sangi Co., Ltd., launched APADENT, the world's first remineralizing toothpaste to use a nano-form of hydroxyapatite, the main component of tooth enamel, rather than fluoride, to remineralize areas of mineral loss below the surface of tooth enamel (incipient caries lesions). After many years of laboratory experiments and field trials, its hydroxyapatite ingredient was approved as an active anti-caries agent by the Japanese Ministry of Health in 1993, and given the name Medical Hydroxyapatite to distinguish it from other forms of hydroxyapatite used in toothpaste, such as dental abrasives.\n\nIn 2006, BioRepair appeared in Europe with the first European toothpaste containing synthetic hydroxylapatite as an alternative to fluoride for the remineralization and reparation of tooth enamel. The \"biomimetic hydroxylapatite\" is intended to protect the teeth by creating a new layer of synthetic enamel around the tooth instead of hardening the existing layer with fluoride that chemically changes it into fluorapatite.\n\nIn 1880, Doctor Washington Sheffield of New London, CT manufactured toothpaste into a collapsible tube, Dr. Sheffield's Creme Dentifrice. He had the idea after his son traveled to Paris and saw painters using paint from tubes. In York in 1896, Colgate & Company Dental Cream was packaged in collapsible tubes imitating Sheffield. The original collapsible toothpaste tubes were made of lead.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "147787", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=147787", "title": "Dango", "text": "Dango\n\n\"Dango\" is eaten year-round, but the different varieties are traditionally eaten in given seasons. Three to five \"dango\" are often served on a skewer.\n\nThe many different varieties of \"dango\" are usually named after the various seasonings served on or with it.\nA common Japanese proverb refers to a preference for practical things rather than aesthetics.\n\nA hairstyle consisting of \"dango\"-like buns on either side of the head is sometimes known as \"odango\".\n\n\"Dorodango\" is a Japanese art form in which earth and water are molded to create a delicate, shiny sphere, resembling a billiard ball.\n\nThe Unicode emoji character 🍡 is used to resemble Hanami dango. The character was introduced in October 2010.\n\n"}
{"id": "147796", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=147796", "title": "Onigiri", "text": "Onigiri\n\n, also known as , , rice ball, is a Japanese food made from white rice formed into triangular or cylindrical shapes and often wrapped in \"nori\" (seaweed). Traditionally, an onigiri is filled with pickled ume (\"umeboshi\"), salted salmon, katsuobushi, kombu, tarako, or any other salty or sour ingredient as a natural preservative. Most Japanese convenience stores stock their onigiri with various fillings and flavors. There are even specialized shops which only sell onigiri to take out. Due to the popularity of this trend in Japan, onigiri has become a popular staple in Japanese restaurants worldwide.\n\nDespite common misconceptions, onigiri is not a form of sushi and should not be confused with the type of sushi called \"nigirizushi\" or simply \"nigiri\". Onigiri is made with plain rice (sometimes lightly salted), while sushi is made of rice with vinegar, sugar and salt. Onigiri makes rice portable and easy to eat as well as preserving it, while sushi originated as a way of preserving fish.\n\nIn Murasaki Shikibu's 11th-century diary \"Murasaki Shikibu Nikki\", she writes of people eating rice balls. At that time, onigiri were called \"tonjiki\" and often consumed at outdoor picnic lunches. Other writings, dating back as far as the seventeenth century, state that many samurai stored rice balls wrapped in bamboo sheath as a quick lunchtime meal during war, but the origins of onigiri are much earlier even than Lady Murasaki. Before the use of chopsticks became widespread, in the Nara period, rice was often rolled into a small ball so that it could be easily picked up. In the Heian period, rice was also made into small rectangular shapes known as \"tonjiki\" so that they could be piled onto a plate and easily eaten.\n\nFrom the Kamakura period to the early Edo period, onigiri was used as a quick meal. This made sense as cooks simply had to think about making enough onigiri and did not have to concern themselves with serving. These onigiri were simply balls of rice flavored with salt. Nori did not become widely available until the Genroku era in the mid-Edo period, when the farming of nori and fashioning it into sheets became widespread.\n\nIn the 1980s, a machine that made triangular onigiri was devised. Rather than rolling the filling inside, the flavoring was put into a hole in the onigiri and the hole was hidden by nori. Since the onigiri made by this machine came with nori already applied to the rice ball, over time the nori became moist and sticky, clinging to the rice. \n\nA packaging improvement allowed the nori to be stored separately from the rice. Before eating, the diner could open the packet of nori and wrap the onigiri. The use of a hole for filling the onigiri made new flavors of onigiri easier to produce as this cooking process did not require changes from ingredient to ingredient. Modern mechanically wrapped onigiri are specially folded so that the plastic wrapping is between the nori and rice to act as a moisture barrier. When the packaging is pulled open at both ends, the nori and rice come into contact.\n\nUsually, onigiri is made with boiled white rice, though it is sometimes made with different varieties of cooked rice, such as:\n\n\nUmeboshi, okaka, or tsukudani have long been frequently used as fillings for onigiri. Generally, onigiri made with pre-seasoned rice is not filled with ingredients.\n\nTypical fillings are listed below.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "147800", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=147800", "title": "Hiyayakko", "text": "Hiyayakko\n\nThe choice of toppings on the tofu vary among households and restaurants, but a standard combination is chopped green onion with katsuobushi (dried skipjack tuna flakes) and soy sauce. Other toppings include:\n\n\"Hiyayakko\" is also known as \"hiyakko\" or \"yakko-dōfu\". \"Hiya\" means cold, and \"yakko\" refers to the servants of samurai during the Edo period in Japan. They wore a vest on which the \"nail-puller crest\" was attached, on the shoulders; therefore, cutting something (e.g. tofu) into cubes was called . \"\"Hiyakkoi\"\" or \"\"hyakkoi\"\", the Tokyo dialectal term equivalent to the standard Japanese , is also a possible etymology.\n\nIn the \"Tofu Hyakuchin\", it is said that \"hiyayakko\" is so well known that it needs no introduction.\n\nIn haiku, \"hiyayakko\" is a season word for summer. This is because tofu is often enjoyed cold in the summer, warm and boiled in a broth in the winter.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "147804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=147804", "title": "Tempura", "text": "Tempura\n\nA light batter is made of iced water (sometimes sparkling water is used to keep the batter light) and soft wheat flour (cake, pastry or all-purpose flour). Eggs (especially egg yolk), baking soda or baking powder, starch, oil, and/or spices may also be added. Tempura batter is traditionally mixed in small batches using chopsticks for only a few seconds, leaving lumps in the mixture that, along with the cold batter temperature, result in the unique fluffy and crisp tempura structure when cooked. The batter is often kept cold by adding ice, or by placing the bowl inside a larger bowl with ice in it. Overmixing the batter will result in activation of wheat gluten, which causes the flour mixture to become soft and dough-like when fried.\n\nSpecially formulated tempura flour is available in worldwide supermarkets. This is generally light (low-gluten) flour, and occasionally contains leaveners such as baking powder.\n\nTempura generally does not use breadcrumbs (panko) in the coating. Generally, fried foods which are coated with breadcrumbs are considered to be \"furai\", Japanese-invented Western-style deep fried foods, such as \"tonkatsu\" or \"ebi furai\" (fried prawn).\n\nThin slices or strips of vegetables or seafood are dipped in the batter, then briefly deep-fried in hot oil. Vegetable oil or canola oil are most common; however, tempura was traditionally cooked using sesame oil. Many specialty shops still use sesame oil or tea seed oil, and it is thought certain compounds in these oils help to produce light, crispier batter.\n\nThe bits of batter (known as \"tenkasu\") are scooped out between batches of tempura, so they do not burn and leave a bad flavor in the oil. A small mesh scoop (\"Ami jakushi\") is used for this purpose. \"Tenkasu\" are often reserved as ingredients in other dishes or as a topping.\n\nVarious seafood and vegetables are commonly used as the ingredients in traditional tempura.\n\nThe most popular seafood tempura is probably \"ebi\" (shrimp) tempura. Types of seafood used in tempura includes:\n\nVegetables tempura is called \"yasai tempura\". The all vegetable tempura might be served as a vegetarian dish. Types of vegetables includes:\n\nCooked bits of tempura are either eaten with dipping sauce, salted without sauce, or used to assemble other dishes. Tempura is commonly served with grated daikon and eaten hot immediately after frying. In Japan, it is often found in bowls of soba or udon soup often in the form of a shrimp, shiso leaf, or fritter. The most common sauce is tentsuyu sauce (roughly three parts \"dashi\", one part \"mirin\", and one part \"shōyu\"). Alternatively, tempura may be sprinkled with sea salt before eating. Mixtures of powdered green tea and salt or \"yuzu\" and salt are also used.\n\n\"\" is a type of tempura made with mixed vegetable strips, such as onion, carrot, and burdock, and sometimes including shrimp or squid, which are deep fried as small round fritters.\n\nTempura is also used in combination with other foods. When served over \"soba\" (buckwheat noodles), it is called \"tempura soba\" or \"tensoba\". Tempura is also served as a \"donburi\" dish where tempura shrimp and vegetables are served over steamed rice in a bowl (\"tendon\") and on top of \"udon\" soup (\"tempura udon\").\n\nEarlier Japanese deep-fried food was either simply fried without breading or batter, or fried with rice flour. However, toward the end of the 16th century, a fritter-cooking technique using flour and eggs as a batter was acquired from Portuguese missionaries and merchants from the region of Alentejo, who resided in Nagasaki. It came about as a way to fulfill the fasting and abstinence rules for Catholics surrounding the quarterly ember days (Latin: \"Quatuor Tempora\"). Hence, the etymology of the word, tempura. In those days, tempura in Nagasaki was deep-fried in lard with a batter consisting of flour, water, eggs, and salt, and unlike the modern version, was eaten without a dipping sauce.\n\nIn the beginning of the 17th century around the Tokyo Bay area, the raw materials of tempura and its method underwent a remarkable change as the Yatai (food cart) culture gained more popularity. Making the best use of fresh seafood while preserving its delicate taste, tempura used only flour, eggs and water as ingredients and the batter was not flavored. As the batter was mixed minimally in cold water, it avoided the dough-like stickiness caused by the activation of wheat gluten, resulting in the crispy texture which is now characteristic of tempura. It became customary to eat tempura by dipping quickly in a sauce mixed with grated daikon just before it was eaten. Today in Japan the mainstream of tempura recipes basically originate from \"Tokyo style (Edo style)\" tempura, which was invented at the food stalls along the riverside fish market in the Edo period.\n\nThere are several factors for the popularization and flourishing of tempura at Tokyo Bay in the Edo period. The abundance of seafood in the Tokyo Bay is the basic factor. In addition, as oil extraction techniques advanced, cooking oil became inexpensive. In those days, serving deep-fried foods indoors was prohibited in Edo due to a possible fire hazard. Traditional Japanese housing was constructed with paper and wood which could catch fire easily from the tempura oil. For that reason, tempura gained popularity as fast food eaten outside at the food stall. Eating tempura in those days was made to be convenient like fast food as tempura was skewered and eaten with a dipping sauce. Tempura has been considered as one of \"the Edo Delicacies\" along with soba (buckwheat noodles) and sushi which were also food stall take outs. The modern tempura recipe was first published in 1671 in the cook book called \"料理献立抄\". After the Meiji period, tempura was no longer considered as a fast food item but instead developed as a high-class cuisine.\n\nThe word \"tempura\", or the technique of dipping fish and vegetables into a batter and frying them, comes from the word \"tempora\", a Latin word meaning \"times\", \"time period\" used by both Spanish and Portuguese missionaries to refer to the Lenten period or Ember Days (\"ad tempora quadragesima\"), Fridays, and other Christian holy days. Ember Days or \"quattuor tempora\" refer to holy days when Catholics avoid red meat and instead eat fish or vegetables. The idea that the word \"tempura\" may have been derived from the Portuguese noun \"tempero,\" meaning a condiment or seasoning of any kind, or from the verb \"temperar,\" meaning \"to season\" is also possible as the Japanese language could easily have assumed the word \"tempero\" as is, without changing any vowels as the Portuguese pronunciation in this case is similar to the Japanese. There is still today a dish in Portugal very similar to tempura called \"peixinhos da horta\", \"garden fishes\", which consists in green beans dipped in a batter and fried.\n\nThe term \"tempura\" is thought to have gained popularity in southern Japan; it became widely used to refer to any sort of food prepared using hot oil, including some already existing Japanese foods. Today, the word \"tempura\" is also commonly used to refer to \"satsuma age\", a fried fish cake which is made without batter.\n\nIn Japan, restaurants specializing in tempura are called \"tenpura-ya\". Many restaurants offer tempura as part of a set meal or a \"bento\" (lunch box), and it is also a popular ingredient in take-out or convenience store \"bento\" boxes. The ingredients and styles of cooking and serving tempura vary greatly through the country, with importance being placed on using fresh, seasonal ingredients.\n\nOutside Japan (as well as recently in Japan), there are many nontraditional and fusion uses of tempura. Chefs over the world include tempura dishes on their menus, and a wide variety of different batters and ingredients are used, including the nontraditional broccoli, zucchini, asparagus and chuchu. More unusual ingredients may include nori slices, dry fruit such as banana, and ice cream (\"tempura\"-based fried ice cream). American restaurants are known to serve tempura in the form of various meats, particularly chicken, and cheeses, usually mozzarella. A variation is to use panko (breadcrumbs), which results in a crisper consistency than tempura batter. Using panko in Japan would no longer qualify the dish as tempura. It would become something else called fry or pronounced in Japanese as furai. Tempura (particularly shrimp) is often used as a filling in \"makizushi\". A more recent variation of tempura sushi has entire pieces of sushi being dipped in batter and tempura-fried.\n\nIn Bangladesh the blossoms of pumpkins or marrows are often deep fried with a gram of rice flour spice mix creating a Bengali style tempura known as kumro ful bhaja.\n\nIn Taiwan, tempura as described in the preceding is known as \"tiānfùluó\" () and can commonly be found on the menu in Japanese restaurants all over the island. A similar-sounding dish, \"tiánbúlà\" () (lit. sweet, not spicy) is usually sold at night markets; it bears no resemblance whatsoever with tempura, but can be considered a counterpart to Japanese \"oden\".\n\n"}
{"id": "147805", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=147805", "title": "Osechi", "text": "Osechi\n\nOsechi-ryōri (御節料理 or お節料理) are traditional Japanese New Year foods. The tradition started in the Heian period (794-1185). \"Osechi\" are easily recognizable by their special boxes called \"jūbako\" (重箱), which resemble \"bentō\" boxes. Like \"bentō\" boxes, \"jūbako\" are often kept stacked before and after use.\n\nThe dishes that make up \"osechi\" each have a special meaning celebrating the New Year. Some examples are:\n\nThe term \"osechi\" originally referred to \"o-sechi\", a season or significant period. New Year's Day was one of the five seasonal festivals in the Imperial Court in Kyoto. This custom of celebrating particular days was introduced from China into Japan.\n\nOriginally, during the first three days of the New Year, it was a taboo to use a hearth and cook meals, except when cooking \"zōni\". Osechi was made by the close of the previous year, as women did not cook in the New Year.\n\nIn the earliest days, \"osechi\" consisted only of \"nimono\", boiled vegetables with soy sauce and sugar or mirin. Over the generations, the variety of food included in \"osechi\" has increased. Today it may refer to anything prepared specially for the New Year, and some foreign dishes have been adopted as \"Westernized \"osechi\"\" (西洋お節 \"seiyō-osechi\") or as \"Korean-style \"osechi\"\" (朝鮮のお節 \"chōsen no osechi\"). And while \"osechi\" was traditionally prepared at home, it is also sold ready-made in specialty stores, grocery stores, and even convenience stores, such as 7-Eleven.\n\nEspecially in households where \"osechi\" is still homemade, \"toshi-koshi soba\" (年越し蕎麦) is eaten on New Year's Eve. Its name literally means \"year-crossing soba.\" Although there may be some symbolism attributed to it (i.e., long life, health and energy in the upcoming year), this tradition may be regarded as largely pragmatic: the traditional wife, busy cooking several days' worth of food for everyone, would likely prefer to make something simple for immediate consumption. It is considered bad luck by many Japanese to leave any \"toshi-koshi soba\" uneaten.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "147806", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=147806", "title": "Okonomiyaki", "text": "Okonomiyaki\n\nKansai- or Osaka-style okonomiyaki is the predominant version of the dish, found throughout most of Japan. The batter is made of flour, grated nagaimo (a type of yam), water or dashi, eggs and shredded cabbage, and usually contains other ingredients such as green onion, meat (generally thin pork belly, often mistaken for bacon), octopus, squid, shrimp, vegetables, konjac, mochi or cheese. Okonomiyaki is sometimes compared to an omelette or a pancake and may be referred to as a \"Japanese pizza\" or \"Osaka soul food\".\n\nSome okonomiyaki restaurants are grill-it-yourself establishments, where the server produces a bowl of raw ingredients that the customer mixes and grills at tables fitted with \"teppan\", or special hotplates. They may also have a diner-style counter where the cook prepares the dish in front of the customers.\n\nIn Osaka (the largest city in the Kansai region), where this dish is said to have originated, okonomiyaki is prepared much like a pancake. The batter and other ingredients are pan-fried on both sides on either a teppan or a pan using metal spatulas that are later used to slice the dish when it has finished cooking. Cooked okonomiyaki is topped with ingredients that include otafuku/okonomiyaki sauce (similar to Worcestershire sauce but thicker and sweeter), aonori (seaweed flakes), katsuobushi (bonito flakes), Japanese mayonnaise, and pickled ginger (beni shōga).\n\nWhen served with a layer of fried noodles (either yakisoba or udon), the resulting dish is called , the name of which may be derived from the English word \"modern\" or as a contraction of , meaning \"a lot\" or \"piled high\" signifying the volume of food from having both noodles and okonomiyaki.\n\nIn Hiroshima, the ingredients are layered rather than mixed. The layers are typically batter, cabbage, pork, and optional items such as squid, octopus, and cheese. Noodles (yakisoba, udon) are also used as a topping with fried egg and a generous amount of okonomiyaki sauce.\n\nThe amount of cabbage used is usually three to four times the amount used in the Osaka style. It starts out piled very high and is pushed down as the cabbage cooks. The order of the layers may vary slightly depending on the chef's style and preference, and ingredients vary depending on the preference of the customer. This style is also called \"Hiroshima-yaki\" or \"Hiroshima-okonomi\".\n\nOkonomi-mura, in Naka-ku in Hiroshima, was the top food theme park destination for families in Japan according to an April 2004 poll.\n\n\nFood researcher Tekishū Motoyama has pointed out that a sort of thin crepe-like confection called may be an early precursor, though it hardly includes the bare elements that makes it identifiable as \"okonomiyaki\". Records of the word \"funoyaki\" occurs as far back as the 16th century, and Sen no Rikyū writes about it, but what it really was can only be speculated, and may have involved the use of \"fu\" (wheat gluten), though certainly by the late Edo period, \"funoyaki\" referred to a thin crepe baked on a cooking pot, with miso basted on one side.\n\nThis, Motoyama writes, was modified into a form using (sweet bean paste) and came to be called in Kyoto and Osaka, then moved to Edo (Tokyo) where it was named , of which , a specialty of Kōjimachi, was one variant.\n\nIn the Meiji Era, the confection was taken up by the trade, which called it . After the 1923 Great Kantō earthquake when people lacked amenities it became sort of a pastime to cook these crepes. This fad gained great popularity, and soon, besides the sweet types, savory types using fish, vegetables, and various meat began appearing.\n\nA simpler version of \"okonomiyaki\", made with readily available ingredients, became popular in Japan during World War II when there was a short supply of rice. The wheat pancake was nutritious, filling, and inexpensive and was often served as a snack to children.\n\nThe of Kyoto, started around the Taishō era may have been the primitive form of okonomiyaki, as it uses Worcestershire sauce and chopped scallion.\n\nOkonomiyaki and takoyaki are popular street fare in Asia, such as in Taipei, Bangkok and Jakarta.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "147809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=147809", "title": "Mochi", "text": "Mochi\n\n\"Mochi\" is a multicomponent food consisting of polysaccharides, lipids, protein and water. \"Mochi\" has a heterogeneous structure of amylopectin gel, starch grains, and air bubbles. This rice is characterized by its low level of amylose starch, and is derived from short- or medium-grain japonica rices. The protein concentration of the rice is higher than that of normal short-grain rice, and the two also differ in amylose content. In \"mochi\" rice, the amylose content is negligible, and the amylopectin level is high, which results in its gel-like consistency.\n\nMochi is similar to dango, but is made using pounded whole grains while dango are made of rice flour.\n\nThe pounding process of making mochi originates from China, where glutinous rice has been grown and used for thousands of years. A number of Aboriginal Chinese tribes have used this process as part of their traditions. In folklore, the first\" mochitsuki\" ceremony occurred after the Kami are said to have descended to Earth, which was following the birth of rice cultivation in Yamato during the Yayoi period (300 BC – 300 AD). Red rice was the original variation used in the production of \"mochi\". At this time, it was eaten exclusively by the emperor and nobles due to its status as an omen of good fortune. During the Japanese Heian period (794–1192), \"mochi\" was used as a \"food for the gods\" and in religious offerings in Shinto rituals performed by aristocrats. In addition to general good fortune, \"mochi\" was also known as a talisman for happy marriages.\n\nThe first recorded accounts of \"mochi\" being used as a part of New Year's festivities are from the Japanese Heian period. The nobles of the imperial court believed that long strands of freshly made \"mochi\" symbolized long life and well-being, while dried \"mochi\" helped strengthen one's teeth. Accounts of it can also be found in the oldest Japanese novel, \"The Tale of Genji\".\n\n\"Mochi\" continues to be one of the traditional foods eaten around Japanese New Year, as it is sold and consumed in abundance around this time. A special type, called \"kagami mochi\" (mirror mochi), is placed on family altars on December 28 each year. \"Kagami mochi\" is composed of two spheres of \"mochi stacked\" on top of one another, topped with an orange (\"daidai\"). On this occasion, which was originally practiced by the \"samurai\", the round rice cakes of \"kagami mochi\" would be broken, thus symbolizing the mirror's opening and the ending of the New Year's celebrations.\n\nThe cherry blossom (\"sakura\"), is a symbol of Japan and signifies the onset of full-fledged spring. \"Sakuramochi\" is a pink-coloured \"mochi\" surrounding sweet \"anko\" and wrapped in an edible, salted cherry leaf; this dish is usually made during the spring.\n\nChildren's Day is celebrated in Japan on May 5. On this day, the Japanese promote the happiness and well-being of children. \"Kashiwa-mochi\" and \"chimaki\" are made especially for this celebration. \"Kashiwa-mochi\" is white \"mochi\" surrounding a sweet \"anko\" filling with a Kashiwa oak leaf wrapped around it.\n\"Chimaki\" is a variation of a \"dango\" wrapped in bamboo leaves.\n\n\"Hishi mochi\" is a ceremonial dessert presented as a ritual offering on the days leading up to \"Hinamatsuri\" or \"Girls' Day\" in Japan. \"Hishi mochi\" is rhomboid-shaped \"mochi\" with layers of red, green, and white. The three layers are coloured with jasmine flowers, water caltrop, and mugwort.\n\nTraditionally, \"mochi\" was made from whole rice, in a labor-intensive process. The traditional \"mochi\"-pounding ceremony in Japan is \"mochitsuki\":\n\n\"Mochi\" is prepared from a flour of sweet rice (\"mochiko\"). The flour is mixed with water and cooked on a stovetop or in the microwave until it forms a sticky, opaque, white mass. This process is performed twice, and the mass is stirred in between until it becomes malleable and slightly transparent.\n\nWith modern equipment,\" mochi \"can be made at home, with the technology automating the laborious dough pounding. Household \"mochi\" appliances provide a suitable space where the environment of the dough can be controlled.\n\nThe assembly-line sections in\" mochi\" production control these aspects:\n\nVarieties of glutinous and waxy rice are produced as major raw material for mochi. The rice is chosen for tensile strength and compressibility. One study found that in Kantomochi rice 172 and BC3, amylopectin distribution varied and affected the hardness of \"mochi\". Kantomochi rice produced harder, brittle, grainy textures, all undesirable qualities except for ease of cutting. For mass production, the rice variety should be chewy, but easy to separate.\n\nGenerally, two types of machines are used for\" mochi\" production in an assembly line. One machine prepares the dough, while the other forms the dough into consistent shapes, unfilled or with filling. The first type of machine controls the temperature at which the rice gelatinizes. One study found that a temperature of 62 °C corresponds to the gelatinization of\" mochi\". When the temperature fell below 62 °C, the hardening was too slow. It was concluded that a processing temperature below 62 °C was unsuitable for dough preparation.\n\n\"Mochi \"is a variation of a low-calorie, low-fat rice cake. The cake has two essential raw materials, rice and water. Sticky rice (also called sweet rice, \"Oryza sativa\" var. \"glutinosa\", glutinous sticky rice, glutinous rice, waxy rice, botan rice, \"biroin chal, mochi\" rice, pearl rice, and \"pulut\"), whether brown or white, is best for \"mochi\"-making, as long-grain varieties will not expand perfectly. Water is essential in the early stages of preparation. Other additives such as salt and other seasonings and flavourings are important in terms of nutritive value and taste. However, additives can cause breakage of the mass, so should not be added to the rice before the cake is formed. The cake must be steamed (rather than boiled) until it gains a smooth and elastic texture. The balls of rice are then flattened, cut into pieces, or shaped into rounds. The machines for mass production are a hugely expensive investment, and the product should have the proper moisture, to appeal to consumers.\n\nThe manufacturing process of \"mochi\" is:\n\nThe best preservation for\" mochi\" is refrigeration for a short storage period. For preserving larger batches over an extended time, freezing is recommended. The best method for freezing involves wrapping each mochi cake tightly in a sealed plastic bag. Although mochi can be kept in a freezer for almost one year, the frozen \"mochi \"may lose flavor and softness or get freezer-burned.\n\n\"Mochi\" is relatively simple to make, as only a few ingredients are needed for plain, natural \"mochi\". The main ingredient is either Shiratamako or Mochiko, Japanese sweet glutinous rice flours. Both Shiratamako and Mochiko are made from \"mochigome\", a type of Japanese glutinous short-grain rice. The difference between Shiratamako and Mochiko comes from texture and processing methods. Shiratamako flour has been more refined and is a finer flour with a smoother, more elastic feel. Mochiko is less refined and has a doughier texture.\n\nOther ingredients may include water, sugar, and cornstarch to prevent sticking. Other ingredients can be added to create different variations.\n\nThe caloric content of a matchbox-sized piece of \"mochi \"is comparable to that of a bowl of rice. Japanese farmers were known to consume it during the winter to increase their stamina, while the Japanese \"samurai\" took \"mochi\" on their expeditions, as it was easy to carry and prepare. \"Mochi\" is gluten- and cholesterol-free, as it is made from rice flour.\nA single serving of 44.0 g has 96 Calories (kilocalories), 1.0 g of fat, but no trans or saturated fat, 1.0 mg of sodium, 22.0 g of carbohydrates, 0 g of dietary fiber, 6.0 g of sugar, and 1.0 g of protein.\n\nAmylose and amylopectin are both components of starch and polysaccharides made from D-glucose units. The big difference between the two is that amylose is linear because it only has αlpha-1,4-glycosidic bonds. Amylopectin, though, is a branched polysaccharide because it has αlpha-1,4-glycosidic bonds with occasional αlpha-1,6-glycosidic bonds around every 22 D-glucose units. Glutinous rice is nearly 100% composed of amylopectin and almost completely lacks its counterpart, amylose, in its starch granules. A nonglutinous rice grain contains amylose at about 10-30% weight by weight and amylopectin at about 70-90% weight by weight.\n\nGlutinous or waxy type of starches occur in maize, sorghum, wheat, and rice. An interesting characteristic of glutinous rice is that it stains red when iodine is added, whereas nonglutinous rice stains blue. This phenomenon occurs when iodine is mixed with iodide to form tri-iodide and penta-iodide. Penta-iodide intercalates between the starch molecules and stains amylose and amylopectin blue and red, respectively. The gelation and viscous texture of glutinous rice is due to amylopectin being more hygroscopic than amylose, thus water enters the starch granule, causing it to swell, while the amylose leaves the starch granule and becomes part of a colloidal solution. In other words, the higher the amylopectin content, the higher the swelling of the starch granule.\n\nThough the amylopectin content plays a major role in the defined characteristic of viscosity in glutinous rice, factors such as heat also play a very important role in the swelling, since it enhances the uptake of water into the starch granule significantly. The swelling increases at about 10% in volume per 10 °C temperature increase.\n\nThe high amylopectin content of waxy or glutinous starches is genetically controlled by the waxy or wax gene. Its quality of greater viscosity and gelation is dependent on the distribution of the amylopectin unit chains. Grains that have this gene are considered mutants, which explains why most of them are selectively bred to create a grain that is close to having or has a 0% amylose content. The table below summarizes the amylose and amylopectin content of different starches, waxy and nonwaxy:\nThe soaking of the glutinous rice is an elemental step in the preparation of mochi, either traditionally or industrially. During this process, glutinous rice decreases in protein content as it is soaked in water. The chemicals that make up the flavour of plain or \"natural\" mochi are ethyl ester acetic acid, ethanol, 2-butanol, 2 methyl 1-propanol, 1-butanol, 3-methyl 1 butanol, 1-pentanol and propane acid.\n\nMochi is usually composed solely of glutinous rice, however, some variations may include the additions of salt, spices and flavourings such as cinnamon (cinnamaldehyde). Food additives such as sucrose, sorbitol or glycerol may be added to increase viscosity and therefore increase gelatinization. Additives that slow down retrogradation are not usually added since amylopectin has a very stable shelf life due to its high amylopectin content.\n\nMochi's characteristic chewiness is due to the polysaccharides in it. The viscosity and elasticity that account for this chewiness are affected by many factors such as the starch concentration, configuration of the swollen starch granules, the conditions of heating (temperature, heating period and rate of heating) as well as the junction zones that interconnect each polymer chain. The more junction zones the substance has, the stronger the cohesiveness of the gel, thereby forming a more solid-like material. The perfect mochi has the perfect balance between viscosity and elasticity so that it is not inextensible and fragile but rather extensible yet firm.\n\nMany tests have been conducted on the factors that affect the viscoelastic properties of mochi. As puncture tests show, samples with a higher solid (polysaccharide) content show an increased resistance and thereby a stronger and tougher gel. This increased resistance to the puncture test indicate that an increase in solute concentration leads to a more rigid and harder gel with an increased cohesiveness, internal binding, elasticity and springiness which means a decrease in material flow or an increase in viscosity. These results can also be brought about by an increase in heating time.\n\nSensory assessments of the hardness, stickiness and elasticity of mochi and their relationship with solute concentration and heating time were performed. Similar to the puncture test results, sensory tests determine that hardness and elasticity increase with increasing time of heating and solid concentration. However, stickiness of the samples increase with increasing time of heating and solid concentration until a certain level, above which the reverse is observed.\n\nThese relationships are important because too hard or elastic a mochi is undesirable, as is one that is too sticky and will stick to walls of the container.\n\nSuffocation deaths are caused by mochi every year in Japan, especially among elderly people. According to the Tokyo Fire Department which responds to choking cases, mochi sends more than 100 people to the hospital every year in Tokyo alone. Between 2006 and 2009, 18 people died from choking on mochi in the Japanese capital, according to city's fire department. In 2011, Japanese media reported eight mochi-related deaths in Tokyo in January.\n\nEvery year, Japanese authorities warn people to cut mochi into small pieces before eating it. The Tokyo Fire Department even has a website offering tips on how to help someone choking on mochi.\n\nThough mochi is often consumed alone as a major component of a main meal, it is often used as an ingredient in many other prepared foods.\n\nMany types of traditional \"wagashi\" and \"mochigashi\" (Japanese traditional sweets) are made with \"mochi\". For example, \"daifuku\" is a soft round \"mochi\" stuffed with sweet filling, such as sweetened red bean paste (anko) or white bean paste (\"shiro an\"). \"Ichigo daifuku\" is a version containing a whole strawberry inside.\n\n\"Kusa mochi\" is a green variety of \"mochi\" flavored with \"yomogi\" (mugwort). When \"daifuku\" is made with \"kusa mochi\", it is called \"yomogi daifuku\".\n\nSmall balls of ice cream are wrapped inside a mochi covering to make mochi ice cream. In Japan, this is manufactured by the conglomerate Lotte under the name \"Yukimi Daifuku\", \"snow-viewing daifuku\".\n\n\n\nIn Taiwan, a traditional Hakka and Hoklo pounded rice cake was called \"tauchi\" () and came in various styles and forms just like in Japan. Traditional Hakka \"tauchi\" is served as glutinous rice dough, covered with peanut or sesame powder. Not until the Japanese era was Japanese-style mochi introduced and gain popularity. Nowadays, Taiwanese mochi often comes with bean paste fillings.\n\nIn China, \"tangyuan\" is made from glutinous rice flour mixed with a small amount of water to form balls and is then cooked and served in boiling water. Tangyuan is typically filled with black sesame paste or peanut paste and served in the water that it was boiled in.\n\nIn Hong Kong and other Cantonese regions, the traditional \"Lo Mai Chi\" (Chinese: 糯米糍 no6 mai5 ci4) is made of glutinous rice flour in the shape of a ball, with fillings such as crushed peanuts, coconut, red bean paste, and black sesame paste. It can come in a variety of modern flavors such as green tea, mango, taro, strawberry, and more.\n\nIn Philippines, a traditional Filipino sweet snack similar to Japanese mochi is called \"tikoy\" (). There is also another delicacy called \"espasol\" with a taste similar to Japanese \"kinako mochi\", though made with roasted rice flour (not \"kinako\", roasted soy flour).\n\nIn Korea, \"chapssal-tteok\" (Hangul: 찹쌀떡) varieties are made of steamed glutinous rice or steamed glutinous rice flour.\n\nIn Indonesia, \"kue moci\" is usually filled with sweet bean paste and covered with sesame seeds. Kue Moci comes from Sukabumi, West Java.\n\nIn Malaysia, \"kuih kochi\" is made from glutinous rice flour and filled with coconut filling and palm sugar. Another Chinese Malaysians variant, \"loh mai chi\" is made with same ingredients but their fillings are filled with crushed peanuts.\n\nIn Taiwan, a soft version similar to daifuku is called \"moachi\" () in Taiwanese Hokkien and \"mashu\" () in Taiwanese Mandarin.\nIn Hawaii, a dessert variety called \"butter mochi\" is made with butter, sugar, coconut, and other ingredients then baked to make a sponge cake of sorts.\n\n\nSimilar foods in other countries:\n\n"}
{"id": "147812", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=147812", "title": "Soba", "text": "Soba\n\nIn Japan, soba noodles are served in a variety of settings throughout Japan, but are also served by expensive specialty restaurants. Markets sell dried noodles and \"men-tsuyu\", or instant noodle broth, to make home preparation easy. There are a wide variety of dishes, both hot for winter and cold for summer, using these noodles.\n\nSoba can nutritionally complement other grains like white rice and wheat flour. Thiamine, missing from white rice, is present in soba. Soba contains all eight essential amino acids, including lysine, which is lacking in wheat flour. The tradition of eating soba arose in the Edo period.\n\nFagopyrum esculentum, Moench originating in Manchuria.\n\nThe tradition of eating soba originates from the Tokugawa period, also called the Edo period, from 1603 to 1868. In the Tokugawa era, every neighborhood had one or two soba establishments, many also serving sake, which functioned much like modern cafes where locals would stop for a casual meal. At that time, the population of Edo (Tokyo), being considerably wealthier than the rural poor, were more susceptible to beriberi due to their high consumption of white rice, which is low in thiamine. It was discovered that beriberi could be prevented by regularly eating thiamine-rich soba.\n\nSome establishments, especially cheaper and more casual ones, may serve both soba and udon as they are often served in a similar manner. Soba is the traditional noodle of choice for Tokyoites.\n\nSoba is typically eaten with chopsticks, and in Japan, it is considered acceptable to slurp the noodles noisily. This is especially common with hot noodles, as drawing up the noodles quickly into the mouth helps cool them. However, quiet consumption of noodles is no longer uncommon.\n\nLike many Japanese noodles, soba noodles are often served drained and chilled in the summer, and hot in the winter with a soy-based dashi broth. Extra toppings can be added to both hot and cold soba. Toppings are chosen to reflect the seasons and to balance with other ingredients. Most toppings are added without much cooking, although some are deep-fried. Most of these dishes may also be prepared with udon.\n\nChilled soba is often served on a sieve-like bamboo tray called a zaru, sometimes garnished with bits of dried nori seaweed, with a dipping sauce known as \"soba tsuyu\" on the side. The \"tsuyu\" is made of a strong mixture of dashi, sweetened soy sauce (also called \"satōjōyu\") and mirin. Using chopsticks, the diner picks up a small amount of soba from the tray and dips it in the cold \"tsuyu\" before eating it. Wasabi and scallions are often mixed into the \"tsuyu\". Many people think that the best way to experience the unique texture of hand-made soba noodles is to eat them cold, since letting them soak in hot broth changes their consistency. After the noodles are eaten, many people enjoy drinking the water in which the noodles were cooked (\"sobayu\" ), mixed with the leftover tsuyu.\n\n\nSoba is also often served as a noodle soup in a bowl of hot \"tsuyu\". The hot \"tsuyu\" in this instance is thinner than that used as a dipping sauce for chilled soba. Popular garnishes are sliced long onion and shichimi tōgarashi (mixed chili powder).\n\n\nSoba is traditionally eaten on New Year's Eve in most areas of Japan, a tradition that survives to this day (\"Toshikoshi soba\"; ). In the Tokyo area, there is also a tradition of giving out soba to new neighbors after a house move (\"Hikkoshi soba\"), although this practice is now rare.\n\n100 grams of cooked soba yields of energy. Soba contains all eight essential amino acids, including lysine, which is lacking in wheat.\n\nSoba contains a type of polysaccharide that is easily digested. Soba noodles also contain antioxidants, including rutin and quercetin, and essential nutrients including choline, thiamine and riboflavin.\n\nBuckwheat is ready for harvest in three months, allowing four crops a year, mainly in spring, summer, and autumn. In Japan, buckwheat is produced mainly in Hokkaido. Soba that is made with newly harvested buckwheat is called \"shin-soba\". It is sweeter and more flavorful than regular soba.\n\nNagano Prefecture is famous for soba. The noodles are known as Shinshu Soba. One of the reasons for this popularity is that Nagano has natural features well-suited to soba production. The land has plenty of volcanic ash soil because of its highland location. It also has an extreme difference in temperatures. Many famous soba production centers can be found across the prefecture, from the Kurohime and Togakushi highlands in the north to the Kaida highlands in the south, and the prefecture boasts the second-highest production of soba in Japan. Many facilities are also engaged in integrated soba manufacturing, from cultivation to milling and cutting. Many of these facilities provide soba cutting courses for customers, forming one of the major leisure activities of Nagano. \nSoba noodles are produced by mixing soba also known as buckwheat and regular flour, adding water, mixing, kneading, rolling and cutting. As a general rule, only noodles containing 40% or more soba flour can carry the Shinshu name. \n\nBy location\n\nBy ingredients\n\nSunaba, Chōjyu-an, Ōmura-an, Shōgetsu-an, Masuda-ya, Maruka are, typical Soba restaurant's Yagō in Japan (Kantō region), from old time.\n\nSome restaurants have delivery service by scooters (Honda Super Cub) or bicycles.\n\nMoreover, they are a popular inexpensive fast food at railway stations. Mainly, busy salarymen use the service.\n\n\"Soba\" is also the Japanese word for buckwheat. Roasted buckwheat kernels may be made into a grain tea called \"sobacha\", which may be served hot or cold. Buckwheat hulls, or \"sobakawa\" (also called \"sobagara\"), are used to fill pillows. Sometimes, beers are made with roasted buckwheat added as a flavoring, and called \"soba ale\".\n\n\"Soba\" is occasionally used to refer to noodles in general. In Japan, ramen is traditionally called \"chūka soba \"(中華そば) or, before the end of the Second World War, \"shina soba\" (支那そば). Both of these mean \"Chinese noodles\", though the word \"shina \"was replaced by \"chūka\" because the Chinese considered the former term offensive. Parboiled \"chūka soba\" is stir-fried to make yakisoba. The name \"ramen\" is the Japanese pronunciation of the Chinese \"lamian\" (拉麺). Note that these noodles do not contain buckwheat. In this context, 'soba' noodles proper are called \"nihon soba\" (日本蕎麦, 'Japanese soba') as opposed to \"chūka soba\".\n\nIn Okinawa, \"soba\" usually refers to Okinawa soba, a completely different dish of noodles made out of flour, not buckwheat. Okinawa soba is also quite popular in the city of Campo Grande (Brazil), due to influence of Japanese (Okinawan) immigrants. It is eaten at street markets or in special restaurants called \"sobarias\".\n\n\n"}
{"id": "148836", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=148836", "title": "Hong dou tang", "text": "Hong dou tang\n\nHong dou tang (紅豆汤, pinyin: hóng dòu tāng) or red bean soup is a popular Chinese dish served in Mainland China, Hong Kong, and Taiwan. It is categorized as a \"tang shui\" 糖水, (pinyin: táng shǔi) (literally translated as sugar water), or sweet soup. It is often served cold during the summer, and hot in the winter. Leftover red bean soup can also be frozen to make ice pops and is a popular dessert.\n\nIn Cantonese cuisine, a red bean soup made from rock sugar, sun-dried tangerine peels, and lotus seeds is commonly served as a dessert at the end of a restaurant or banquet meal. Common variations include the addition of ingredients such as sago (西米, pinyin: xī mi), tapioca, coconut milk, ice cream, glutinous rice balls, or purple rice. The two types of sugar used interchangeably are rock sugar and sliced sugar (片糖).\n\nUnsweetened red bean porridge made with red beans and rice is eaten across China and East Asia. Japan has a similar variant called Shiruko. It is called \"hóngdòuzhōu\" () in Chinese, \"patjuk\" () in Korean, and \"azukigayu\" () in Japanese.\n\nVietnamese cuisine also has a similar dish, called \"chè đậu đỏ\". It contains added coconut milk and sugar. It is served cold.\n\n"}
{"id": "148858", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=148858", "title": "Kakigōri", "text": "Kakigōri\n\nThe origins of kakigōri date back to the 11th century, when blocks of ice saved during the colder months would be shaved and served with sweet syrup to Japanese aristocracy during the summer. Kakigōri became more accessible in the 19th century, when ice became more widely available to the public during the summertime.\n\nThe traditional way of making kakigōri uses a hand cranked machine to spin a block of ice over a shaving blade. Even though electric shavers are most often used, street vendors can still be seen hand-shaving ice blocks in the summer.\n\nIt is similar to a snow cone but with some notable differences: It has a much smoother fluffier ice consistency, much like fresh fallen snow, and a spoon is almost always used to eat it. The texture of the ice distinguishes kakigōri from other types of shaved ice desserts.\n\nPopular flavors include strawberry, cherry, lemon, green tea, grape, melon, \"Blue Hawaii\", sweet plum, and colorless syrup. Some shops provide colorful varieties by using two or more syrups. To sweeten kakigōri, condensed or evaporated milk is often poured on top of it.\n\nIn addition to the streets, kakigōri is sold in festivals, convenience stores, coffee shops, and restaurants. During the hot summer months, kakigōri is sold virtually everywhere in Japan. Especially at summer festivals and fairs, it is as popular as yakisoba, takoyaki and cotton candy. Kakigôri is one of the summer features in Japan. Some shops serve it with ice cream and sweetened red beans or tapioca pearls.\n\n is a type of kakigōri, a Japanese dessert made from shaved ice flavored with condensed milk, small colorful mochi, fruits, and sweet bean paste (usually Azuki bean). Mandarin orange, cherry, pineapple, and raisins are often used to make shirokuma. \nShirokuma has been popular in Kagoshima since the middle of the Edo period and is well-known to many Japanese. Condensed milk, fruit, and sweet bean paste are served over shaved ice. It is eaten in cafés and in some department stores, such as Yamakataya (山形屋) or Mujaki.\n\nShirokuma literally means \"white bear\" and indicates \"polar bear\" in Japanese. There are some views about the origin of the name.\n\nIn one account, there was a cotton shop in Kagoshima city. The shop started to sell kakigōri as its side-business. The kakigōri was flavored with condensed milk. When the owner was thinking of a name for it, he noticed the picture of a polar bear was printed on the labels of the condensed milk's can.\n\nAnother account is that Mujaki, a coffee shop in Kagoshima City, started to sell the kakigōri, put milk syrup, \"sanshoku-kanten\" (colorful agar), yōkan (soft azuki-bean jelly), sweet beans and fruits in a pattern that resembled a polar bear when seen from overhead, so it was named shirokuma.\n\nYet others say that it was created in honour of the memory of Saigo Takamori after his battle with the Edo Shogun.\n\nIn Kagoshima, some similar named kakigōri are made. Kurokuma flavored with dark brown unrefined sugar syrup, coffee or caramel syrup and kiguma flavored with mango pulp syrup are made in some coffee shops.\n\nSupermarkets in southern Kyushu, especially in Kagoshima City, Kagoshima, and mom-and-pop candy stores sell shirokuma as a popular product. Shirokuma are often eaten at Kagoshima fairs which are held in other prefectures. Shirokuma in cups are sold at convenience stores all over Japan.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "148859", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=148859", "title": "Anmitsu", "text": "Anmitsu\n\nAnmitsu (, rarely ) is a Japanese dessert that has been popular for many decades.\n\nIt is made of small cubes of agar jelly, a white translucent jelly made from red algae. The agar is dissolved with water (or fruit juice such as apple juice) to make the jelly. It is served in a bowl with sweet azuki bean paste or \"anko\" (the \"an\" part of \"anmitsu\"), boiled peas, often \"gyūhi\" and a variety of fruits such as peach slices, \"mikan\", pieces of pineapples, and cherries. The anmitsu usually comes with a small pot of sweet black syrup, or \"mitsu\" (the \"mitsu\" part of \"anmitsu\") which one pours onto the jelly before eating. Anmitsu is usually eaten with a spoon and fork.\n\nA few variations on this dessert do exist. Mitsumame is anmitsu without bean paste, the \"mame\" meaning the peas that are served with the syrup and agar jelly instead. Cream anmitsu is anmitsu with ice cream on top. Shiratama dango are also commonly used as toppings.\n\n"}
{"id": "148866", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=148866", "title": "Uirō", "text": "Uirō\n\nUirō (Japanese: , , ), also known as , is a traditional Japanese steamed cake made of rice flour and sugar. It is chewy, similar to \"mochi\", and subtly sweet. Flavors include azuki bean paste, green tea (matcha), \"yuzu\", strawberry and chestnut. Nagoya is particularly famous for its \"uirō\", and there are other regional versions, notably in Yamaguchi and Odawara, although Odawara's \"uirō\" is better known as a medicine. It can be purchased in traditional Japanese confectionery shops throughout Japan.\n\n\"Uirō\" was originally the name of a medicine in the Muromachi period (1336–1573). References to \"uirō\" as a confection first appear in the \"Wa-Kan Sansai Zue\", Ryōan Terajima's massive Edo-period dictionary published in 1712.\n\n"}
{"id": "149058", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=149058", "title": "Bulletproof vest", "text": "Bulletproof vest\n\nA ballistic vest or bullet-resistant vest, often called a bulletproof vest, is an item of personal armor that helps absorb the impact and reduce or stop penetration to the body from firearm-fired projectiles and shrapnel from explosions, and is worn on the torso. Soft vests are made of many layers of woven or laminated fibres and can protect the wearer from small-calibre handgun and shotgun projectiles, and small fragments from explosives such as hand grenades.\n\nThese vests often have a ballistic plate inserted into the vest. Metal or ceramic plates can be used with a soft vest, providing additional protection against rifle rounds, and metallic components or tightly woven fibre layers can give soft armour resistance to stab and slash attacks from knives and similar close-quarter weapons. Soft vests are commonly worn by police forces, private citizens who are at risk of being shot (e.g., national leaders), security guards, and bodyguards, whereas hard-plate reinforced vests are mainly worn by combat soldiers, police tactical units, and hostage rescue teams.\n\nBody armor may combine a ballistic vest with other items of protective clothing, such as a combat helmet. Vests intended for police and military use may also include ballistic shoulder and side protection armor components, and bomb disposal officers wear heavy armour and helmets with face visors and spine protection.\n\nBallistic vests use layers of very strong fibers to \"catch\" and deform a bullet, mushrooming it into a dish shape, and spreading its force over a larger portion of the vest fiber. The vest absorbs the energy from the deforming bullet, bringing it to a stop before it can completely penetrate the textile matrix. Some layers may be penetrated but as the bullet deforms, the energy is absorbed by a larger and larger fiber area.\n\nWhile a vest can prevent bullet penetration, the vest and wearer still absorb the bullet's impulse. Even without penetration, heavy bullets deal enough force to cause blunt force trauma under the impact point. Vest specifications will typically include both penetration resistance requirements and limits on the amount of impact force that is delivered to the body.\n\nOn the other side, some bullets can penetrate the vest, but still deal low damage to its wearer because of speed loss or their small mass/form.\n\nVests designed for bullets offer less protection against blows from sharp implements, such as knives, arrows or ice picks, or from bullets manufactured with hardened materials, e.g., those containing a steel core instead of lead. This is because the impact force of these objects stays concentrated in a relatively small area, allowing them a better likelihood of puncturing the fiber layers of most bullet-resistant fabrics used in soft armor. By contrast, stab vests provide better protection against sharp implements, but are generally less effective against bullets. However, soft armor will still protect against most slashing attacks.\n\nTextile vests may be augmented with metal (steel or titanium), ceramic or polyethylene plates that provide extra protection to vital areas. These hard armor plates have proven effective against all handgun bullets and a range of rifles. These upgraded ballistic vests have become standard in military use, as soft body armor vests are ineffective against military rifle rounds. Prison guards and police often wear vests which are designed specifically against bladed weapons and sharp objects. These vests may incorporate coated and laminated para-aramid textiles or metallic components.\n\nIn 1538, Francesco Maria della Rovere commissioned Filippo Negroli to create a bulletproof vest. In 1561, Maximilian II, Holy Roman Emperor is recorded as testing his armor against gun-fire. Similarly, in 1590 Sir Henry Lee expected his Greenwich armor to be \"pistol proof\". Its actual effectiveness was controversial at the time. The etymology of \"bullet\" and the adjective form of \"proof\" in the late 16th century would suggest that the term \"bulletproof\" originated shortly thereafter.\n\nDuring the English Civil War Oliver Cromwell's Ironside cavalry were equipped with Capeline helmets and musket-proof cuirasses which consisted of two layers of armor plate (in later studies involving X-ray a third layer was discovered which was placed in between the outer and inner layer). The outer layer was designed to absorb the bullet's energy and the thicker inner layer stopped further penetration. The armor would be left badly dented but still serviceable. One of the first recorded descriptions of soft armor use was found in medieval Japan, with the armor having been manufactured from silk.\n\nOne of the first examples of commercially sold bulletproof armour was produced by a tailor in Dublin, Ireland in the 1840s. \"The Cork Examiner\" reported on his line of business in December 1847:\n\nAnother soft ballistic vest, Myeonje baegab, was invented in Joseon, Korea in the 1860s shortly after the French campaign against Korea. The Heungseon Daewongun ordered development of bullet-proof armor because of increasing threats from Western armies. Kim Gi-Doo and Gang Yoon found that cotton could protect against bullets if 10 layers of cotton fabric were used. The vests were used in battle during the United States expedition to Korea, when the US Navy attacked Ganghwa Island in 1871. The US Navy captured one of the vests and took it to the US, where it was stored at the Smithsonian Museum until 2007. The vest has since been sent back to Korea and is currently on display to the public.\n\nSimple ballistic armor was sometimes constructed by criminals. During the 1880s, a gang of Australian bushrangers led by Ned Kelly made basic armour from plough blades. By this time the Victorian Government had a reward for the capture of a member of the Kelly Gang at £8,000 (equivalent to 2 million Australian dollars in 2005). One of the stated aims of Kelly was the establishment of a Republic in North East Victoria. Each of the four Kelly gang members had fought a siege at a hotel clad in suits of armour made from the mouldboards of ploughs. The maker's stamp (Lennon Number 2 Type) was found inside several of the plates. The armour covered the men's torsos, upper arms, and upper legs, and was worn with a helmet. The suits were roughly made on a creek bed using a makeshift forge and a stringy-bark log as a muffled anvil. The suits had a mass of around 44 kg (96 lb) but eventually were of no use as the suits lacked protection for the legs and hands.\n\nAmerican outlaw and gunfighter Jim Miller was infamous for wearing a steel breastplate over his frock coat as a form of body armor. This plate saved Miller on two occasions, and it proved to be highly resistant to pistol bullets and shotguns. One example can be seen in his gun battle with a sheriff named George A. \"Bud\" Frazer, where the plate managed to deflect all bullets from the lawmen's six-shooter.\nIn 1881, Tombstone physician George E. Goodfellow noticed that a faro dealer Charlie Storms who was shot twice by Luke Short had one bullet stopped by a silk handkerchief in his breast pocket that prevented that bullet from penetrating. In 1887, he wrote an article titled \"Impenetrability of Silk to Bullets\" for the \"Southern California Practitioner\" documenting the first known instance of bulletproof fabric. He experimented with silk vests resembling medieval gambesons, which used 18 to 30 layers of silk fabric to protect the wearers from penetration.\n\nFr. Kazimierz Żegleń used Goodfellow's findings to develop a bulletproof vest made of silk fabric at the end of the 19th century, which could stop the relatively slow rounds from black powder handguns. The vests cost US$800 each in 1914, a small fortune given the $20.67/1oz-Au exchange-rate back then, equivalent to ~$50,000 circa 2016, exceeding mean annual income.\n\nA similar vest, made by Polish inventor Jan Szczepanik in 1901, saved the life of Alfonso XIII of Spain when he was shot by an attacker. By 1900, US gangsters were wearing $800 silk vests to protect themselves.\n\nOn 28 June 1914, Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria, heir to the throne of Austria-Hungary was fatally shot, triggering World War I; despite owning a silk bulletproof vest, which tests by Britain's Royal Armouries indicate would likely have stopped a bullet of that era, and despite being aware of potential threats to his life including an attempted assassination of his uncle a few years earlier, Ferdinand was not wearing his on that fateful day.\n\nThe combatants of World War I started the war without any attempt at providing the soldiers with body armor. Various private companies advertised body protection suits such as the Birmingham Chemico Body Shield, although these products were generally far too expensive for an average soldier.\n\nThe first official attempts at commissioning body armor were made in 1915 by the British Army Design Committee, in particular a 'Bomber's Shield' for the use of bomber pilots who were notoriously under-protected in the air from anti-aircraft bullets and shrapnel. The Experimental Ordnance Board also reviewed potential materials for bullet and fragment proof armor, such as steel plate. A 'necklet' was successfully issued on a small scale (due to cost considerations), which protected the neck and shoulders from bullets traveling at 600 feet per second with interwoven layers of silk and cotton stiffened with resin. The Dayfield body shield entered service in 1916 and a hardened breastplate was introduced the following year.\n\nThe British army medical services calculated towards the end of the War, that three quarters of all battle injuries could have been prevented if an effective armor had been issued.\n\nThe French also experimented with steel visors attached to the Adrian helmet and 'abdominal armor' designed by General Adrian. These failed to be practical, because they severely impeded the soldier's mobility. The Germans officially issued body armor in the shape of nickel and silicon armor plates that was called \"sappenpanzer\" (nicknamed 'Lobster armor') from late 1916. These were similarly too heavy to be practical for the rank-and-file, but were used by static units, such as sentries and occasionally the machine-gunners. An improved version, the Infantrie-Panzer, was introduced in 1918, with hooks for equipment.\nThe United States developed several types of body armor, including the chrome nickel steel Brewster Body Shield, which consisted of a breastplate and a headpiece and could withstand Lewis Gun bullets at , but was clumsy and heavy at . A scaled waistcoat of overlapping steel scales fixed to a leather lining was also designed; this armor weighed , fit close to the body, and was considered more comfortable.\n\nDuring the late 1920s through the early 1930s, gunmen from criminal gangs in the United States began wearing less-expensive vests made from thick layers of cotton padding and cloth. These early vests could absorb the impact of handgun rounds such as .22 Long Rifle, .25 ACP, .32 S&W Long, .32 S&W, .380 ACP, .38 Special and .45 ACP traveling at speeds of up to . To overcome these vests, law enforcement agents such as the FBI began using the newer and more powerful .38 Super, and later the .357 Magnum cartridge.\n\nIn 1940, the Medical Research Council in Britain proposed the use of a lightweight suit of armor for general use by infantry, and a heavier suit for troops in more dangerous positions, such as anti-aircraft and naval gun crews. By February 1941, trials had begun on body armor made of manganese steel plates. Two plates covered the front area and one plate on the lower back protected the kidneys and other vital organs. Five thousand sets were made and evaluated to almost unanimous approval – as well as providing adequate protection, the armor didn't severely impede the mobility of the soldier and were reasonably comfortable to wear. The armor was introduced in 1942 although the demand for it was later scaled down. The Canadian Army in northwestern Europe also adopted this armor for the medical personnel of the 2nd Canadian Infantry Division.\n\nThe British company Wilkinson Sword began to produce flak jackets for bomber crew in 1943 under contract with the Royal Air Force. It was realised that the majority of pilot deaths in the air was due to low velocity fragments rather than bullets. Surgeon of the United States Army Air Forces, Colonel M. C. Grow, stationed in Britain, thought that many wounds he was treating could have been prevented by some kind of light armor. Two types of armor were issued for different specifications. These jackets were made of nylon fabric and capable of stopping flak and shrapnel, but were not designed to stop bullets. Although they were considered too bulky for pilots using the Avro Lancaster bombers, they were adopted by United States Army Air Forces.\n\nIn the early stages of World War II, the United States also designed body armor for infantrymen, but most models were too heavy and mobility-restricting to be useful in the field and incompatible with existing required equipment. Near the middle of 1944, development of infantry body armor in the United States restarted. Several vests were produced for the US military, including but not limited to the T34, the T39, the T62E1, and the M12. The United States developed a vest using Doron Plate, a fiberglass-based laminate. These vests were first used in the Battle of Okinawa in 1945.\nThe Soviet Armed Forces used several types of body armor, including the SN-42 (\"Stalnoi Nagrudnik\" is Russian for \"steel breastplate\", and the number denotes the design year). All were tested, but only the SN-42 was put in production. It consisted of two pressed steel plates that protected the front torso and groin. The plates were 2 mm thick and weighed 3.5 kg (7.7 lb). This armor was generally supplied to SHISBr (assault engineers) and Tankodesantniki. The SN armor protected wearers from 9×19mm bullets fired by an MP 40 at around 100 meters, and sometimes it was able to deflect 7.92 Mauser bullets (and bayonet blades), but only at very low angle. Which made it useful in urban battles such as the Battle of Stalingrad. However, the SN's weight made it impractical for infantry in the open.\n\nDuring the Korean War several new vests were produced for the United States military, including the M-1951, which made use of fibre-reinforced plastic or aluminium segments woven into a nylon vest. These vests represented \"a vast improvement on weight, but the armor failed to stop bullets and fragments very successfully,\" although officially they were claimed to be able to stop 7.62×25mm Tokarev pistol rounds at the muzzle. Developed by Natick Laboratories and introduced in 1967, T65-2 plate carriers were the first vests designed to hold hard ceramic plates, making them capable of stopping 7 mm rifle rounds.\n\nThese \"Chicken Plates\" were made of either boron carbide, silicon carbide, or aluminium oxide. They were issued to the crew of low-flying aircraft, such as the UH-1 and UC-123, during the Vietnam War.\n\nIn 1969, American Body Armor was founded and began to produce a patented combination of quilted nylon faced with multiple steel plates. This armor configuration was marketed to American law enforcement agencies by Smith & Wesson under the trade name \"Barrier Vest.\" The Barrier Vest was the first police vest to gain wide use during high threat police operations.\n\nIn 1971, research chemist Stephanie Kwolek discovered a liquid crystalline polymer solution. Its exceptional strength and stiffness led to the invention of Kevlar, a synthetic fibre, woven into a fabric and layered, that, by weight, has five times the tensile strength of steel. In the mid-1970s, DuPont the company which employed Kwolek introduced Kevlar. Immediately Kevlar was incorporated into a National Institute of Justice (NIJ) evaluation program to provide lightweight, able body armor to a test pool of American law enforcement officers to ascertain if everyday able wearing was possible. Lester Shubin, a program manager at the NIJ, managed this law enforcement feasibility study within a few selected large police agencies, and quickly determined that Kevlar body armor could be comfortably worn by police daily, and would save lives.\n\nIn 1975 Richard A. Armellino, the founder of American Body Armor, marketed an all Kevlar vest called the K-15, consisting of 15 layers of Kevlar that also included a 5\" × 8\" ballistic steel \"Shok Plate\" positioned vertically over the heart and was issued US Patent #3,971,072 for this innovation. Similarly sized and positioned \"trauma plates\" are still used today on the front ballistic panels of most able vests, reducing blunt trauma and increasing ballistic protection in the center-mass heart/sternum area.\n\nIn 1976, Richard Davis, founder of Second Chance Body Armor, designed the company's first all-Kevlar vest, the Model Y. The lightweight, able vest industry was launched and a new form of daily protection for the modern police officer was quickly adapted. By the mid-to-late 1980s, an estimated 1/3 to 1/2 of police patrol officers wore able vests daily. By 2006, more than 2,000 documented police vest \"saves\" were recorded, validating the success and efficiency of lightweight able body armor as a standard piece of everyday police equipment.\n\nDuring the 1980s, the US military issued the PASGT kevlar vest, tested privately at NIJ level IIA by several sources, able to stop pistol rounds (including 9 mm FMJ), but intended and approved only for fragmentation. West Germany issued a similar rated vest called the Splitterschutzweste.\n\nKevlar soft armor had its shortcomings because if \"large fragments or high velocity bullets hit the vest, the energy could cause life-threatening, blunt trauma injuries\" in selected, vital areas. Ranger Body Armor was developed for the American military in 1991. Although it was the second modern US body armor that was able to stop rifle caliber rounds and still be light enough to be worn by infantry soldiers in the field, it still had its flaws: \"it was still heavier than the concurrently issued PASGT (Personal Armor System for Ground Troops) anti-fragmentation armor worn by regular infantry and ... did not have the same degree of ballistic protection around the neck and shoulders.\" The format of Ranger Body Armor (and more recent body armor issued to US special operations units) highlights the trade-offs between force protection and mobility that modern body armor forces organizations to address.\nNewer armor issued by the United States armed forces to large numbers of troops includes the United States Army's Improved Outer Tactical Vest and the United States Marine Corps Modular Tactical Vest. All of these systems are designed with the vest intended to provide protection from fragments and pistol rounds. Hard ceramic plates, such as the Small Arms Protective Insert, as used with Interceptor Body Armor, are worn to protect the vital organs from higher level threats. These threats mostly take the form of high velocity and armor-piercing rifle rounds. Similar types of protective equipment have been adopted by modern armed forces over the world.\n\nSince the 1970s, several new fibers and construction methods for bulletproof fabric have been developed besides woven Kevlar, such as DSM's Dyneema, Honeywell's Gold Flex and Spectra, Teijin Aramid's Twaron, Pinnacle Armor's Dragon Skin, and Toyobo's Zylon. The US military has developed body armor for the working dogs who aid GIs in battle.\n\nSince 2004, U.S. Special Operations Command has been at work on a new full-body armor that will rely on rheology, or the technology behind the elasticity of liquids in skin care and automotive products. Named TALOS, this new technology may be used in the future.\n\nDue to the various types of projectile, it is often inaccurate to refer to a particular product as \"bulletproof\" because this implies that it will protect against any and all threats. Instead, the term bullet resistant is generally preferred.\n\nBody armor standards are regional. Around the world ammunition varies and as a result the armor testing must reflect the threats found locally. Law enforcement statistics show that many shootings where officers are injured or killed involve the officer's own weapon. As a result, each law enforcement agency or para-military organization will have their own standard for armor performance if only to ensure that their armor protects them from their own weapons. While many standards exist, a few standards are widely used as models. The US National Institute of Justice ballistic and stab documents are examples of broadly accepted standards. In addition to the NIJ, the UK Home Office Scientific Development Branch (HOSDB – formerly the Police Scientific Development Branch (PSDB)) standards are used by a number of other countries and organizations. These \"model\" standards are usually adapted by other countries by incorporation of the basic test methodologies with modification of the bullets that are required for test.\n\nNIJ Standard-0101.06 has specific performance standards for bullet resistant vests used by law enforcement. This rates vests on the following scale against penetration and also blunt trauma protection (deformation): In the first half of 2018, NIJ is expected to introduce the new NIJ Standard-0101.07. This new standard will completely replace the NIJ Standard-0101.06. The current system of using Roman numerals (II, IIIA, III, and IV) to indicate the level of threat will disappear and be replaced by a naming convention similar to the standard developed by UK Home Office Scientific Development Branch. HG is for soft armor and RF is for hard armor. Another important change is that the test-round velocity for conditioned armor will be the same as that for new armor during testing. For example, for NIJ Standard-0101.06 Level IIIA the .44 Magnum round is currently shot at 408 m/s for conditioned armor and at 436 m/s for new armor. For the NIJ Standard-0101.07, the velocity for both conditioned and new armor will be the same. \n\nNIJ standards are used for law enforcement armors. The US and NATO military armor designs are tested using a standard set of test methods under ARMY MIL-STD-662F and STANAG 2920 Ed2. This approach defines the test process under the 662F/2920 standard. Each armor program can select a unique series of projectiles and velocities as required. The DOD and MOD armor programs-of-record (MTV for example) procure armor using these test standards. In addition, special requirements can be defined under this process for armors for flexible rifle protection, fragment protection for the extremities, etc. These military procurement requirements do not relate to NIJ, HOSDB or ISO law enforcement armor standards, test methods, garment size, projectiles or velocities.\n\nIn addition to the NIJ and HOSDB law enforcement armor standards, other important standards include German Police TR-Technische Richtlinie, Draft ISO prEN ISO 14876, and Underwriters Laboratories (UL Standard 752).\n\nTextile armor is tested for both penetration resistance by bullets and for the impact energy transmitted to the wearer. The \"backface signature,\" or transmitted impact energy, is measured by shooting armor mounted in front of a backing material, typically oil-based modeling clay. The clay is used at a controlled temperature and verified for impact flow before testing. After the armor is impacted with the test bullet, the vest is removed from the clay and the depth of the indentation in the clay is measured.\n\nThe backface signature allowed by different test standards can be difficult to compare. Both the clay materials and the bullets used for the test are not common. In general the British, German and other European standards allow 20–25 mm of backface signature, while the US-NIJ standards allow for 44 mm, which can potentially cause internal injury. The allowable backface signature for body armor has been controversial from its introduction in the first NIJ test standard and the debate as to the relative importance of penetration-resistance vs. backface signature continues in the medical and testing communities.\n\nIn general a vest's textile material temporarily degrades when wet. Neutral water at room temp does not affect para-aramid or UHMWPE but acidic, basic and some other solutions can permanently reduce para-aramid fiber tensile strength. (As a result of this, the major test standards call for wet testing of textile armor.) Mechanisms for this wet loss of performance are not known. Vests that will be tested after ISO type water immersion tend to have heat sealed enclosures and those that are tested under NIJ type water spray methods tend to have water resistant enclosures.\n\nFrom 2003 to 2005, a large study of the environmental degradation of Zylon armor was undertaken by the US-NIJ. This concluded that water, long-term use, and temperature exposure significantly affect tensile strength and the ballistic performance of PBO or Zylon fiber. This NIJ study on vests returned from the field demonstrated that environmental effects on Zylon resulted in ballistic failures under standard test conditions.\n\nMeasuring the ballistic performance of armor is based on determining the kinetic energy of a bullet at impact (\"E\" = ½ \"mv\"). Because the energy of a bullet is a key factor in its penetrating capacity, velocity is used as the primary independent variable in ballistic testing. For most users the key measurement is the velocity at which no bullets will penetrate the armor. Measuring this zero penetration velocity (\"v\") must take into account variability in armor performance and test variability. Ballistic testing has a number of sources of variability: the armor, test backing materials, bullet, casing, powder, primer and the gun barrel, to name a few.\n\nVariability reduces the predictive power of a determination of V0. If for example, the \"v\" of an armor design is measured to be with a 9 mm FMJ bullet based on 30 shots, the test is only an estimate of the real \"v\" of this armor. The problem is variability. If the \"v\" is tested again with a second group of 30 shots on the same vest design, the result will not be identical.\n\nOnly a single low velocity penetrating shot is required to reduce the \"v\" value. The more shots made the lower the \"v\" will go. In terms of statistics, the zero penetration velocity is the tail end of the distribution curve. If the variability is known and the standard deviation can be calculated, one can rigorously set the V0 at a confidence interval. Test Standards now define how many shots must be used to estimate a \"v\" for the armor certification. This procedure defines a confidence interval of an estimate of \"v\". (See \"NIJ and HOSDB test methods\".)\n\n\"v\" is difficult to measure, so a second concept has been developed in ballistic testing called the ballistic limit (\"v\"). This is the velocity at which 50 percent of the shots go through and 50 percent are stopped by the armor. US military standard MIL-STD-662F V50 Ballistic Test define a commonly used procedure for this measurement. The goal is to get three shots that penetrate that are slower than a second faster group of three shots that are stopped by the armor. These three high stops and three low penetrations can then be used to calculate a \"v\" velocity.\n\nIn practice this measurement of \"v\" requires 1–2 vest panels and 10–20 shots. A very useful concept in armor testing is the offset velocity between the \"v\" and \"v\". If this offset has been measured for an armor design, then \"v\" data can be used to measure and estimate changes in \"v\". For vest manufacturing, field evaluation and life testing both \"v\" and \"v\" are used. However, as a result of the simplicity of making \"v\" measurements, this method is more important for control of armor after certification.\n\nAfter the Vietnam War, military planners developed a concept of “Casualty Reduction”. The large body of casualty data made clear that in a combat situation, fragments, not bullets, were the most important threat to soldiers. After WWII, vests were being developed and fragment testing was in its early stages. Artillery shells, mortar shells, aerial bombs, grenades, and antipersonnel mines are all fragmentation devices. They all contain a steel casing that is designed to burst into small steel fragments or shrapnel, when their explosive core detonates. After considerable effort measuring fragment size distribution from various NATO and Soviet bloc munitions, a fragment test was developed. Fragment simulators were designed, and the most common shape is a right circular cylinder or RCC simulator. This shape has a length equal to its diameter. These RCC Fragment Simulation Projectiles (FSPs) are tested as a group. The test series most often includes 2 grain (0.13 g), 4 grain (0.263 g), 16 grain (1.0 g), and 64 grain (4.2 g) mass RCC FSP testing. The 2-4-16-64 series is based on the measured fragment size distributions.\nThe second part of “Casualty Reduction” strategy is a study of velocity distributions of fragments from munitions. Warhead explosives have blast speeds of to . As a result, they are capable of ejecting fragments at very high speeds of over , implying very high energy (where the energy of a fragment is ½ mass × velocity, neglecting rotational energy). The military engineering data showed that, like the fragment size, the fragment velocities had characteristic distributions. It is possible to segment the fragment output from a warhead into velocity groups. For example, 95% of all fragments from a bomb blast under have a velocity of or less. This established a set of goals for military ballistic vest design.\n\nThe random nature of fragmentation required the military vest specification to trade off mass vs. ballistic-benefit. Hard vehicle armor is capable of stopping all fragments, but military personnel can only carry a limited amount of gear and equipment, so the weight of the vest is a limiting factor in vest fragment protection. The 2-4-16-64 grain series at limited velocity can be stopped by an all-textile vest of approximately 5.4 kg/m (1.1 lb/ft). In contrast to the design of vest for deformable lead bullets, fragments do not change shape; they are steel and can not be deformed by textile materials. The FSP (the smallest fragment projectile commonly used in testing) is about the size of a grain of rice; such small fast moving fragments can potentially slip through the vest, moving between yarns. As a result, fabrics optimized for fragment protection are tightly woven, although these fabrics are not as effective at stopping lead bullets.\n\nOne of the critical requirements in soft ballistic testing is measurement of \"back side signature\" (i.e. energy delivered to tissue by a non-penetrating projectile) in a deformable backing material placed behind the targeted vest. The majority of military and law enforcement standards have settled on an oil/clay mixture for the backing material, known as Roma Plastilena. Although harder and less deformable than human tissue, Roma represents a “worst case” backing material when plastic deformations in the oil/clay are low (less than 20 mm). (Armor placed over a harder surface is more easily penetrated.) The oil/clay mixture of \"Roma\" is roughly twice the density of human tissue and therefore does not match its specific gravity, however \"Roma\" is a plastic material that will not recover its shape elastically, which is important for accurately measuring potential trauma through back side signature.\n\nThe selection of test backing is significant because in flexible armor, the body tissue of a wearer plays an integral part in absorbing the high energy impact of ballistic and stab events. However the human torso has a very complex mechanical behavior. Away from the rib cage and spine, the soft tissue behavior is soft and compliant. In the tissue over the sternum bone region, the compliance of the torso is significantly lower. This complexity requires very elaborate bio-morphic backing material systems for accurate ballistic and stab armor testing. A number of materials have been used to simulate human tissue in addition to Roma. In all cases, these materials are placed behind the armor during test impacts and are designed to simulate various aspects of human tissue impact behavior.\n\nOne important factor in test backing for armor is its hardness. Armor is more easily penetrated in testing when backed by harder materials, and therefore harder materials, such as Roma clay, represent more conservative test methods.\n\nStab and spike armor standards have been developed using 3 different backing materials. The Draft EU norm calls out Roma clay, The California DOC called out 60% ballistic gelatin and the current standard for NIJ and HOSDB calls out a multi-part foam and rubber backing material.\n\nThis history helps explain an important factor in Ballistics and Stab armor testing, backing stiffness affects armor penetration resistance. The energy dissipation of the armor-tissue system is Energy = Force × Displacement when testing on backings that are softer and more deformable the total impact energy is absorbed at lower force. When the force is reduced by a softer more compliant backing the armor is less likely to be penetrated. The use of harder Roma materials in the ISO draft norm makes this the most rigorous of the stab standards in use today.\n\nBecause of the limitations of the technology a distinction is made between handgun protection and rifle protection. See NIJ levels 3 and 4 for typical requirements for rifle resistant armor. Broadly rifle resistant armor is of three basic types: ceramic plate-based systems, steel plate with spall fragmentation protective coating, and hard fiber-based laminate systems. Many rifle armor components contain both hard ceramic components and laminated textile materials used together. Various ceramic materials types are in use, however: aluminum oxide, boron carbide and silicon carbide are the most common. The fibers used in these systems are the same as found in soft textile armor. However, for rifle protection high pressure lamination of ultra high molecular weight polyethylene with a Kraton matrix is the most common.\n\nThe Small Arms Protective Insert (SAPI) and the enhanced SAPI plate for the US DOD generally has this form. Because of the use of ceramic plates for rifle protection, these vests are 5–8 times as heavy on an area basis as handgun protection. The weight and stiffness of rifle armor is a major technical challenge. The density, hardness and impact toughness are among the materials properties that are balanced to design these systems. While ceramic materials have some outstanding properties for ballistics they have poor fracture toughness. Failure of ceramic plates by cracking must also be controlled. For this reason many ceramic rifle plates are a composite. The strike face is ceramic with the backface formed of laminated fiber and resin materials. The hardness of the ceramic prevents the penetration of the bullet while the tensile strength of the fiber backing helps prevent tensile failure. Examples of rifle resistant outer vests include the Interceptor body armor and the Improved Outer Tactical Vest.\n\nThe standards for armor-piercing rifle bullets aren't clear-cut, because the penetration of a bullet depends on the hardness of the target armor. However, there are a few general rules. For example, bullets with a soft lead-core and copper jacket are too easily deformed to penetrate hard materials, whereas rifle bullets manufactured with very hard core materials, like tungsten carbide, are designed for maximum penetration into hard armor. Most other core materials would have effects between lead and tungsten carbide. Many common bullets, such as the 7.62×39mm M43 standard cartridge for the AK-47 rifle, have a steel core with hardness rating ranging from Rc35 mild steel up to Rc45 medium hard steel.\n\nAdditionally, as the hardness of the bullet core increases, so must the amount of ceramic plating used to stop penetration. Like in soft ballistics, a minimum ceramic material hardness of the bullet core is required to damage their respective hard core materials, however in armor-piercing rounds the bullet core is eroded rather than deformed.\n\nThe US Department of Defense uses two classes of protection from armor-piercing rifle bullets. The first, the Small Arms Protective Insert (SAPI), called for ceramic composite plates with a mass of 20–30 kg/m (4–5 lb/ft). Later, the Enhanced SAPI (ESAPI) specification was developed to protect from more penetrative ammunition. ESAPI ceramic plates have a density of 35–45 kg/m (7–9 lb/ft), and are designed to stop bullets like the .30-06 AP (M2) with an engineered hard core.\n\nCercom, now BAE systems, CoorsTek, Ceradyne, TenCate Advanced Composites, Honeywell, DSM, Pinnacle Armor and a number of other engineering companies develop and manufacture the materials for composite ceramic rifle armor.\n\nBomb disposal officers often wear heavy armor designed to protect against most effects of a moderate sized explosion, such as bombs encountered in terror threats. Full head helmet, covering the face and some degree of protection for limbs is mandatory in addition to very strong armor for the torso. An insert to protect the spine is usually applied to the back, in case an explosion blasts the wearer. Visibility and mobility of the wearer is severely limited, as is the time that can be spent working on the device. Armor designed primarily to counter explosives is often somewhat less effective against bullets than armor designed for that purpose. The sheer mass of most bomb disposal armor usually provides some protection, and bullet-specific trauma plates are compatible with some bomb disposal suits. Bomb disposal technicians try to accomplish their task if possible using remote methods (e.g., robots, line and pulleys). Actually laying hands on a bomb is only done in an extremely life-threatening situation, where the hazards to people and critical structures cannot be lessened by using wheeled robots or other techniques.\n\nIn the mid-1980s the state of California Department of Corrections issued a requirement for a body armor using a commercial ice pick as the test penetrator. The test method attempted to simulate the capacity of a human attacker to deliver impact energy with their upper body. As was later shown by the work of the former British PSDB, this test over stated the capacity of human attackers. The test used a drop mass or sabot that carried the ice pick. Using gravitational force, the height of the drop mass above the vest was proportional to the impact energy. This test specified 109 joules (81 ft·lb) of energy and a 7.3 kg (16 lb) drop mass with a drop height of 153 cm (60 in).\n\nThe ice pick has a 4 mm (0.16 in) diameter with a sharp tip with a 5.4 m/s (17 ft/s) terminal velocity in the test. The California standard did not include knife or cutting edge weapons in the test protocol. The test method used the oil/clay (Roma Plastilena) tissue simulant as a test backing. In this early phase only titanium and steel plate offerings were successful in addressing this requirement. Point Blank developed the first ice pick certified offerings for CA Department of Corrections in shaped titanium sheet metal. Vests of this type are still in service in US corrections facilities as of 2008.\n\nBeginning in the early 1990s, an optional test method was approved by California which permitted the use of 10% ballistic gelatin as a replacement for Roma clay. The transition from hard, dense clay-based Roma to soft low-density gelatin allowed all textile solutions to meet this attack energy requirement. Soft all textile “ice pick” vests began to be adopted by California and other US states as a result of this migration in the test methods. It is important for users to understand that the smooth, round tip of the ice pick does not cut fiber on impact and this permits the use of textile based vests for this application.\n\nThe earliest of these “all” fabric vests designed to address this ice pick test was Warwick Mills's TurtleSkin ultra tightly woven para-aramid fabric with a patent filed in 1993. Shortly after the TurtleSkin work, in 1995 DuPont patented a medium density fabric that was designated as Kevlar Correctional. It should be noted that these textile materials do not have equal performance with cutting-edge threats and these certifications were only with ice pick and were not tested with knives.\n\nParallel to the US development of “ice pick” vests, the British police, PSDB, was working on standards for knife-resistant body armor. Their program adopted a rigorous scientific approach and collected data on human attack capacity. Their ergonomic study suggested three levels of threat: 25, 35 and 45 joules of impact energy. In addition to impact energy attack, velocities were measured and were found to be 10–20 m/s (much faster than the California test). Two commercial knives were selected for use in this PSDB test method. In order to test at a representative velocity, an air cannon method was developed to propel the knife and sabot at the vest target using compressed air. In this first version, the PSDB ’93 test also used oil/clay materials as the tissue simulant backing. The introduction of knives which cut fiber and a hard-dense test backing required stab vest manufacturers to use metallic components in their vest designs to address this more rigorous standard. The current standard HOSDB Body Armour Standards for UK Police (2007) Part 3: Knife and Spike Resistance is harmonized with the US NIJ OO15 standard, use a drop test method and use a composite foam backing as a tissue simulant. Both the HOSDB and the NIJ test now specify engineered blades, double-edged S1 and single-edge P1 as well as the spike.\n\nIn addition to the stab standards, HOSDB has developed a standard for slash resistance (2006). This standard, like the stab standards, is based on drop testing with a test knife in a mounting of controlled mass. The slash test uses the Stanley Utility knife or box cutter blades. The slash standard tests the cut resistance of the armor panel parallel to the direction of blade travel. The test equipment measures the force at the instant the blade tip produces a sustained slash through the vest. The criteria require that slash failure of the armor be greater than 80 newtons of force.\n\nVests that combined stab and ballistic protection were a significant innovation in the 1990s period of vest development. The starting point for this development were the ballistic-only offerings of that time using NIJ Level 2A, 2, and 3A or HOSDB HG 1 and 2, with compliant ballistic vest products being manufactured with areal densities of between 5.5 and 6 kg/m² (1.1 and 1.2 lb/ft² or 18 and 20 oz/ft²). However police forces were evaluating their “street threats” and requiring vests with both knife and ballistic protection. This multi-threat approach is common in the United Kingdom and other European countries and is less popular in the USA. Unfortunately for multi-threat users, the metallic array and chainmail systems that were necessary to defeat the test blades offered little ballistic performance. The multi-threat vests have areal densities are close to the sum of the two solutions separately. These vests have mass values in the 7.5–8.5 kg/m² (1.55–1.75 lb/ft²) range. Ref (NIJ and HOSDB certification listings). Rolls Royce Composites -Megit and Highmark produced metallic array systems to address this HOSDB standard. These designs were used extensively by the London Metropolitan Police Service and other agencies in the United Kingdom.\n\nAs vest manufactures and the specifying authorities worked with these standards, the UK and US Standards teams began a collaboration on test methods. A number of issues with the first versions of the tests needed to be addressed. The use of commercial knives with inconsistent sharpness and tip shape created problems with test consistency. As a result, two new “engineered blades” were designed that could be manufactured to have reproducible penetrating behavior. The tissue simulants, Roma clay and gelatin, were either unrepresentative of tissue or not practical for the test operators. A composite-foam and hard-rubber test backing was developed as an alternative to address these issues. The drop test method was selected as the baseline for the updated standard over the air cannon option. The drop mass was reduced from the “ice pick test” and a wrist-like soft linkage was engineered into the penetrator-sabot to create a more realistic test impact. These closely related standards were first issued in 2003 as HOSDB 2003 and NIJ 0015. (The Police Scientific Development Branch (PSDB) was renamed the Home Office Scientific Development Branch in 2004.)\n\nThese new standards created a focus on Level 1 at , Level 2 at , Level 3 at protection as tested with the new engineered knives defined in these test documents. The lowest level of this requirement at 25 joules was addressed by a series of textile products of both wovens, coated wovens and laminated woven materials. All of these materials were based on Para-aramid fiber. The co-efficient of friction for ultra high molecular weigh polyethylene (UHMWPE) prevented its use in this application. The TurtleSkin DiamondCoat and Twaron SRM products addressed this requirement using a combination of Para-Aramid wovens and bonded ceramic grain. These ceramic-coated products do not have the flexibility and softness of un-coated textile materials.\n\nFor the higher levels of protection L2 and L3, the very aggressive penetration of the small, thin P1 blade has resulted in the continued use of metallic components in stab armor. In Germany, Mehler Vario Systems developed hybrid vests of woven para-aramid and chainmail, and their solution was selected by London's Metropolitan Police Service. Another German company BSST, in cooperation with Warwick Mills, has developed a system to meet the ballistic-stab requirement using Dyneema laminate and an advanced metallic-array system, TurtleSkin MFA. This system is currently implemented in the Netherlands. The trend in multi threat armor continues with requirements for needle protection in the Draft ISO prEN ISO 14876 norm. In many countries there is also an interest to combine military style explosive fragmentation protection with bullet-ballistics and stab requirements.\n\nIn order for ballistic protection to be wearable the ballistic panels and hard rifle-resistant plates are fitted inside a special carrier. The carrier is the visible part of a ballistic vest. The most basic carrier includes pockets which hold the ballistic panels and straps for mounting the carrier on the user. There are two major types of carriers: military or tactical carriers that are worn over the shirt, and covert law enforcement type carriers that are worn under the shirt.\n\nThe military type of carrier, English police waistcoat carrier, or police tactical carrier most typically has a series of webbing, hook and loop, and snap type connectors on the front and back face. This permits the wearer to mount various gear to the carrier in many different configurations. This load carriage feature is an important part of uniform and operational design for police weapons teams and the military.\n\nIn addition to load carriage, this type of carrier may include pockets for neck protection, side plates, groin plates, and backside protection. Because this style of carrier is not close fitting, sizing in this system is straightforward for both men and women, making custom fabrication unnecessary.\n\nLaw enforcement carriers in some countries are concealable. The carrier holds the ballistic panels close to the wearer's body and a uniform shirt is worn over the carrier. This type of carrier must be designed to conform closely to the officer's body shape. For concealable armor to conform to the body it must be correctly fitted to a particular individual. Many programs specify full custom measurement and manufacturing of armor panels and carriers to ensure good fit and comfortable armor. Officers who are either female or significantly overweight have more difficulty in getting accurately measured and having comfortable armor fabricated.\n\nA third textile layer is often found between the carrier and the ballistic components. The ballistic panels are covered in a coated pouch or slip. This slip provides the encapsulation of the ballistic materials. Slips are manufactured in two types: heat sealed hermetic slips and simple sewn slips. For some ballistic fibers such as Kevlar the slip is a critical part of the system. The slip prevents moisture from the user's body from saturating the ballistic materials. This protection from moisture cycling increases the useful life of the armor.\n\nIn recent years, advances in material science have opened the door to the idea of a literal \"bulletproof vest\" able to stop handgun and rifle bullets with a soft textile vest, without the assistance of additional metal or ceramic plating. However, progress is moving at a slower rate compared to other technical disciplines. The most recent offering from Kevlar, Protera, was released in 1996. Current soft body armor can stop most handgun rounds (which has been the case for roughly 15 years ), but armor plates are needed to stop rifle rounds and steel-core handgun rounds such as 7.62×25mm. The para-aramids have not progressed beyond the limit of 23 grams per denier in fiber tenacity.\n\nModest ballistic performance improvements have been made by new producers of this fiber type. Much the same can be said for the UHMWPE material; the basic fiber properties have only advanced to the 30–35 g/d range. Improvements in this material have been seen in the development of cross-plied non-woven laminate, e.g. Spectra Shield. The major ballistic performance advance of fiber PBO is known as a \"cautionary tale\" in materials science. This fiber permitted the design of handgun soft armor that was 30–50% lower in mass as compared to the aramid and UHMWPE materials. However this higher tenacity was delivered with a well-publicized weakness in environmental durability.\n\nAkzo-Magellan (now DuPont) teams have been working on fiber called M5 fiber; however, its announced startup of its pilot plant has been delayed more than 2 years. Data suggests if the M5 material can be brought to market, its performance will be roughly equivalent to PBO. In May 2008, the Teijin Aramid group announced a “super-fibers” development program. The Teijin emphasis appears to be on computational chemistry to define a solution to high tenacity without environmental weakness.\n\nThe materials science of second generation “super” fibers is complex, requires large investments, and represent significant technical challenges. Research aims to develop artificial spider silk which could be super strong, yet light and flexible. Other research has been done to harness nanotechnology to help create super-strong fibers that could be used in future bulletproof vests. In 2018, the US military began conducting research into the feasibility of using artificial silk as body armor, which has the advantages of its light weight and its cooling capability.\n\nFiner yarns and lighter woven fabrics have been a key factor in improved ballistic results. The cost of ballistic fiber goes up dramatically as yarn size goes down, so it is unclear how long this trend can continue. The current practical limit of fiber size is 200 denier with most wovens limited at the 400 denier level. Three-dimensional weaving with fibers connecting flat wovens together into a 3D system are being considered for both hard and soft ballistics. Team Engineering Inc is designing and weaving these multi layer materials. Dyneema DSM has developed higher performance laminates using a new, higher strength fiber designated SB61, and HB51. DSM feels this advanced material provides some improved performance, however the SB61 “soft ballistic” version has been recalled. At the Shot Show in 2008, a unique composite of interlocking steel plates and soft UHWMPE plate was exhibited by TurtleSkin. In combination with more traditional woven fabrics and laminates a number of research efforts are working with ballistic felts. Tex Tech has been working on these materials. Like the 3D weaving, Tex Tech sees the advantage in the 3-axis fiber orientation.\n\nBallistic nylon (until the 1970) or Kevlar, Twaron or Spectra (a competitor for Kevlar) or polyethylene fiber could be used to manufacture bullet proof vests. The vests of the time were made of ballistic nylon & supplemented by plates of fiber-glass, steel, ceramic, titanium, Doron & composites of ceramic and fiberglass, the last being the most effective.\n\na. Making the panel cloth-\n1. To make Kevlar cloth, the Kevlar yarns are woven in the simplest pattern, plain or tabby weave. which is merely the over & under pattern of threads that interlace alternatively.\n2. Unlike Kevlar, the Spectra used in bulletproof vests is usually not woven. instead the strong polyethelene polymer filaments are spun into fibers that are then laid parallel to each other. Resin is used to coat the fibers, sealing them together to form a sheet of Spectra cloth. Two sheets of cloth are then placed at right angles to one another and again bonded, forming a nonwoven fabric that is next sandwiched between two sheets of polyethelene film. The vest shape can then be cut from the material.\n\nb. Cutting The panels-\n\nC. Sewing the ballistic panels-\n\nd. Finishing the vest-\nThe shells for the panels are sewn together in the same standard industrial sewing machines and standard sewing practices. The panels are then slipped inside the shells and the accessories—such as the straps—are sewn on. The finished bulletproof vest is boxed and shipped to the customer.\n\nWhen a hand gun bullet strikes body armor, it is caught in a \"web\" of extremely strong fibers. These fibers absorb and disperse the impact energy that is transmitted to the bullet proof vest from the bullet causing the bullet to deform, otherwise known as a \"mushroom\". Additional energy is absorbed by each successive layer or material in bullet proof vests until such time as the bullet has been stopped.\n\nCeramic plates work by locally shattering where the projectile strikes, and are capable of dispersing the energy of the projectile to the point where the bullet has been stopped. Unfortunately, this means that ceramic plates become progressively less capable of stopping additional bullets, and may be rendered unusable after a certain number of hits have been taken.\n\nCeramic materials, materials processing and progress in ceramic penetration mechanics are significant areas of academic and industrial activity. This combined field of ceramics armor research is broad and is perhaps summarized best by The American Ceramics Society. ACerS has run an annual armor conference for a number of years and compiled a proceedings 2004–2007. An area of special activity pertaining to vests is the emerging use of small ceramic components. Large torso sized ceramic plates are complex to manufacture and are subject to cracking in use. Monolithic plates also have limited multi hit capacity as a result of their large impact fracture zone These are the motivations for new types of armor plate. These new designs use two- and three-dimensional arrays of ceramic elements that can be rigid, flexible or semi-flexible. Dragon Skin body armor is one of these systems. European developments in spherical and hexagonal arrays have resulted in products that have some flex and multi hit performance. The manufacture of array type systems with flex, consistent ballistic performance at edges of ceramic elements is an active area of research. In addition advanced ceramic processing techniques arrays require adhesive assembly methods. One novel approach is use of hook and loop fasteners to assemble the ceramic arrays.\n\nCurrently, there are a number of methods by which nanomaterials are being implemented into body armor production. The first, developed at University of Delaware is based on nanoparticles within the suit that become rigid enough to protect the wearer as soon as a kinetic energy threshold is surpassed. These coatings have been described as shear thickening fluids. These nano-infused fabrics have been licensed by BAE systems, but as of mid-2008, no products have been released based on this technology.\n\nIn 2005 an Israeli company, ApNano, developed a material that was always rigid. It was announced that this nanocomposite based on tungsten disulfide nanotubes was able to withstand shocks generated by a steel projectile traveling at velocities of up to 1.5 km/s. The material was also reportedly able to withstand shock pressures generated by other impacts of up to 250 metric tons-force per square centimeter (24.5 gigapascals; 3,550,000 psi). During the tests, the material proved to be so strong that after the impact the samples remained essentially unmarred. Additionally, a study in France tested the material under isostatic pressure and found it to be stable up to at least 350 tf/cm² (34 GPa; 5,000,000 psi).\n\nAs of mid-2008, spider silk bulletproof vests and nano-based armors are being developed for potential market release. Both the British and American militaries have expressed interest in a carbon fiber woven from carbon nanotubes that was developed at University of Cambridge and has the potential to be used as body armor. In 2008, large format carbon nanotube sheets began being produced at Nanocomp.\n\nIn late 2014, researchers began studying and testing graphene as a material for use in body armor. Graphene is manufactured from carbon and is the thinnest, strongest, and most conductive material on the planet. Taking the form of hexagonally arranged atoms, its tensile strength is known to be 200 times greater than steel, but studies from Rice University have revealed it is also 10 times better than steel at dissipating energy, an ability that had previously not been thoroughly explored. To test its properties, the University of Massachusetts stacked together graphene sheets only a single carbon atom thick, creating layers ranging in thickness from 10 nanometers to 100 nanometers from 300 layers. Microscopic spherical silica \"bullets\" were fired at the sheets at speeds of up to 3 km (1.9 mi) per second, almost nine times the speed of sound. Upon impact, the projectiles deformed into a cone shape around the graphene before ultimately breaking through. In the three nanoseconds it held together however, the transferred energy traveled through the material at a speed of 22.2 km (13.8 mi) per second, faster than any other known material. If the impact stress can be spread out over a large enough area that the cone moves out at an appreciable velocity compared with the velocity of the projectile, stress will not be localized under where it hit. Although a wide impact hole opened up, a composite mixture of graphene and other materials could be made to create a new, revolutionary armor solution.\n\nIn Australia, it is illegal to import body armour without prior authorisation from Australian Customs and Border Protection Service. It is also illegal to\npossess body armour without authorization in South Australia, Victoria, Northern Territory, ACT, Queensland, New South Wales, and Tasmania.\n\nIn all Canadian provinces except for Alberta, British Columbia and Manitoba, it is legal to wear and to purchase body armour such as ballistic vests. Under the laws of these provinces, it is illegal to possess body armour without a license (unless exempted) issued by the provincial government. Nova Scotia has passed similar laws, but they are not yet in force.\n\nAccording to the Body Armour Control Act of Alberta which came into force on June 15, 2012, any individual in possession of a valid firearms licence under the Firearms Act of Canada can legally purchase, possess and wear body armour.\n\nUnder Schedule C (item ML13) of Cap. 60G Import and Export (Strategic Commodities) Regulations, \"armoured or protective equipment, constructions and components\" are not regulated \"when accompanying their user for the user’s own personal protection\".\n\nIn the Netherlands the civilian ownership of body armour is subject to the European Union regulations. Body armour in various ballistic grades is sold by a range of different vendors, mainly aimed at providing to security guards and VIP's. The use of body armour while committing a crime is not an additional offense in itself, but may be interpreted as so under different laws such as resisting arrest.\n\nUnited States law restricts possession of body armor for convicted violent felons. Many U.S. states also have penalties for possession or use of body armor by felons. In other states, such as Kentucky, possession is not prohibited, but probation or parole is denied to a person convicted of committing certain violent crimes while wearing body armor and carrying a deadly weapon. Most states do not have restrictions for non-felons.\n\nIn Italy, the purchase, ownership and wear of ballistic vests and body armor is not subject to any restriction, except for those ballistic protections that are developed under strict military specifications and/or for main military usage, thus considered by the law as \"armament materials\" and forbidden to civilians. Furthermore, a number of laws and court rulings during the years have rehearsed the concept of a ballistic vest being mandatory to wear for those individuals who work in the private security sector.\n\nIn European Union import and sale of ballistic vests and body armor are allowed in Europe, except protections that are developed under strict military specifications and/or for main military usage, shield above the level of protection NIJ 4, thus considered by the law as \"armament materials\" and forbidden to civilians. There are many shops in Europe that sell ballistic vests and body armor, used or new.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "149184", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=149184", "title": "Zabaione", "text": "Zabaione\n\nZabaione () or zabaglione is an Italian dessert, or sometimes a beverage, made with egg yolks, sugar, and a sweet wine (usually Moscato d'Asti or Marsala wine). Some versions of the recipe incorporate spirits such as cognac. The dessert version is a light custard, whipped to incorporate a large amount of air. Since the 1960s, in restaurants in areas of the United States with large Italian populations, zabaione is usually served with strawberries, blueberries, peaches, etc. in a champagne coupe. In France, it is called \"sabayon\", while its Italian name is \"zabaione\" or \"zabaglione\" (or \"zabajone\", an archaic spelling).\n\nThe dessert is popular in Argentina and Uruguay, where it is known as \"sambayón\" (from the piedmontese \"sambajon\"). It is a popular ice cream flavour in Argentina's ice-cream shops. In Colombia, the name is \"sabajón\". In Venezuela there is also a related egg-based dessert drink called \"ponche crema\". This is consumed almost exclusively at Christmas time.\n\nClassical zabaione uses raw egg yolks cooked in a bain-marie, and most often served with Marsala (though other wines can be substituted). It can be finished with beaten egg white (meringue) or sometimes with whipped cream.\n\nOccasionally, the wine is omitted when the dish is served to children or those who abstain from alcohol. It is then in effect a very different dessert. It may then be sometimes flavoured with a small amount of espresso.\n\nThe French adopted the recipe as part of their system of sauces in the 1800s as a dessert cream called \"sabayon\". By the 20th century the name sabayon was also used to describe savory broths and yolk-based sauces.\n\n"}
{"id": "149920", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=149920", "title": "Toy", "text": "Toy\n\nA toy is an item that is used in play, especially one designed for such use. Playing with toys can be an enjoyable means of training young children for life in society. Different materials like wood, clay, paper, and plastic are used to make toys. Many items are designed to serve as toys, but goods produced for other purposes can also be used. For instance, a small child may fold an ordinary piece of paper into an airplane shape and \"fly it\".\nNewer forms of toys include interactive digital entertainment. Some toys are produced primarily as collectors' items and are intended for display only.\n\nThe origin of toys is prehistoric; dolls representing infants, animals, and soldiers, as well as representations of tools used by adults are readily found at archaeological sites. The origin of the word \"toy\" is unknown, but it is believed that it was first used in the 14th century. Toys are mainly made for children. The oldest known doll toy is thought to be 4,000 years old.\n\nPlaying with toys is considered to be important when it comes to growing up and learning about the world around us. Younger children use toys to discover their identity, help their bodies grow strong, learn cause and effect, explore relationships, and practice skills they will need as adults. Adults on occasion use toys to form and strengthen social bonds, teach, help in therapy, and to remember and reinforce lessons from their youth.\n\nMost children have been said to play with whatever they can find, such as sticks and rocks.\nToys and games have been unearthed from the sites of ancient civilizations. They have been written about in some of the oldest literature. Toys excavated from the Indus valley civilization (3010–1500 BCE) include small carts, whistles shaped like birds, and toy monkeys which could slide down a string.\n\nThe earliest toys are made from materials found in nature, such as rocks, sticks, and clay. Thousands of years ago, Egyptian children played with dolls that had wigs and movable limbs which were made from stone, pottery, and wood. In Ancient Greece and Ancient Rome, children played with dolls made of wax or terracotta, sticks, bows and arrows, and yo-yos. When Greek children, especially girls, came of age it was customary for them to sacrifice the toys of their childhood to the gods. On the eve of their wedding, young girls around fourteen would offer their dolls in a temple as a rite of passage into adulthood.\n\nThe oldest known mechanical puzzle also comes from Greece and appeared in the 3rd century BCE. The game consisted of a square divided into 14 parts, and the aim was to create different shapes from these pieces. In Iran \"puzzle-locks\" were made as early as the 17th century (AD).\n\nToys became more widespread with the changing attitudes towards children engendered by the Enlightenment. Children began to be seen as people in and of themselves, as opposed to extensions of their household and that they had a right to flourish and enjoy their childhood. The variety and number of toys that were manufactured during the 18th century steadily rose; John Spilsbury invented the first jigsaw puzzle in 1767 to help children learn geography. He created puzzles on eight themes – the World, Europe, Asia, Africa, America, England and Wales, Ireland and Scotland. The rocking horse (on bow rockers) was developed at the same time in England, especially with the wealthy as it was thought to develop children's balance for riding real horses.\nBlowing bubbles from leftover washing up soap became a popular pastime, as shown in the painting \"The Soap Bubble\" (1739) by Jean-Baptiste-Siméon Chardin. Other popular toys included hoops, toy wagons, kites, spinning wheels and puppets. The first board games were produced by John Jefferys in the 1750s, including \"A Journey Through Europe\". The game was very similar to modern board games; players moved along a track with the throw of a dice (a teetotum was actually used) and landing on different spaces would either help or hinder the player.\n\nIn the nineteenth century, the emphasis was put on toys that had an educational purpose to them, such as puzzles, books, cards and board games. Religiously themed toys were also popular, including a model Noah's Ark with miniature animals and objects from other Bible scenes. With growing prosperity among the middle class, children had more leisure time on their hands, which led to the application of industrial methods to the manufacture of toys.\n\nMore complex mechanical and optics-based toys were also invented. Carpenter and Westley began to mass-produce the kaleidoscope, invented by Sir David Brewster in 1817, and had sold over 200,000 items within three months in London and Paris. The company was also able to mass-produce magic lanterns for use in phantasmagoria and galanty shows, by developing a method of mass production using a copper plate printing process. Popular imagery on the lanterns included royalty, flora and fauna, and geographical/man-made structures from around the world. The modern zoetrope was invented in 1833 by British mathematician William George Horner and was popularized in the 1860s. Wood and porcelain dolls in miniature doll houses were popular with middle class girls, while boys played with marbles and toy trains.\n\nThe golden age of toy development was at the turn of the 20th century. Real wages were rising steadily in the Western world, allowing even working-class families to afford toys for their children, and industrial techniques of precision engineering and mass production was able to provide the supply to meet this rising demand. Intellectual emphasis was also increasingly being placed on the importance of a wholesome and happy childhood for the future development of children. William Harbutt, an English painter, invented plasticine in 1897, and in 1900 commercial production of the material as a children's toy began. Frank Hornby was a visionary in toy development and manufacture and was responsible for the invention and production of three of the most popular lines of toys based on engineering principles in the twentieth century: Meccano, Hornby Model Railways and Dinky Toys.\n\nMeccano was a model construction system that consisted of re-usable metal strips, plates, angle girders, wheels, axles and gears, with nuts and bolts to connect the pieces and enabled the building of working models and mechanical devices. Dinky Toys pioneered the manufacture of die-cast toys with the production of toy cars, trains and ships and model train sets became popular in the 1920s. The Britain's company revolutionized the production of toy soldiers with the invention of the process of hollow casting in lead in 1893 – the company's products remained the industry standard for many years.\n\nPuzzles became greatly fashionable as well. In 1893, the English lawyer , writing under the pseudonym of Professor Hoffman, wrote a book called \"Puzzles Old and New\". It contained, amongst other things, more than 40 descriptions of puzzles with secret opening mechanisms. This book grew into a reference work for puzzle games and was very popular at the time. The Tangram puzzle, originally from China, spread to Europe and America in the 19th century.\n\nDuring the Second World War, some new types of toys were created through accidental innovation. After trying to create a replacement for synthetic rubber, the American Earl L. Warrick inadvertently invented \"nutty putty\" during World War II. Later, Peter Hodgson recognized the potential as a childhood plaything and packaged it as Silly Putty. Similarly, Play-Doh was originally created as a wallpaper cleaner. In 1943 Richard James was experimenting with springs as part of his military research when he saw one come loose and fall to the floor. He was intrigued by the way it flopped around on the floor. He spent two years fine-tuning the design to find the best gauge of steel and coil; the result was the Slinky, which went on to sell in stores throughout the United States.\n\nAfter the Second World War as society became ever more affluent and new technology and materials (plastics) for toy manufacture became available, toys became cheap and ubiquitous in households across the Western World. Among the more well known products of the 1950s there was the Danish company Lego's line of colourful interlocking plastic brick construction sets, Rubik's Cube, Mr. Potato Head, the Barbie doll and Action Man. Today there are computerized dolls that can recognize and identify objects, the voice of their owner, and choose among hundreds of pre-programmed phrases with which to respond. The materials that toys are made from have changed, what toys can do has changed, but the fact that children play with toys has not.\n\nThe act of children's play with toys embodies the values set forth by the adults of their specific community, but through the lens of the child's perspective. Within cultural societies, toys are a medium to enhance a child's cognitive, social, and linguistic learning.\n\nIn some cultures, societies utilize toys as a way to enhance a child's skillset within the traditional boundaries of their future roles in the community. In Saharan and North African cultures, play is facilitated by children through the use of toys to enact scenes recognizable in their community such as hunting and herding. The value is placed in a realistic version of development in preparing a child for the future they are likely to grow up into. This allows the child to imagine and create a personal interpretation of how they view the adult world.\n\nHowever, in other cultures, toys are used to expand the development of a child's cognition in an idealistic fashion. In these communities, adults place the value of play with toys to be on the aspirations they set forth for their child. In the Western culture, the Barbie and Action-Man represent lifelike figures but in an imaginative state out of reach from the society of these children and adults. These toys give way to a unique world in which children's play is isolated and independent of the social constraints placed on society leaving the children free to delve into the imaginary and idealized version of what their development in life could be.\n\nIn addition, children from differing communities may treat their toys in different ways based on their cultural practices. Children in more affluent communities may tend to be possessive of their toys, while children from poorer communities may be more willing to share and interact more with other children. The importance the child places on possession is dictated by the values in place within the community that the children observe on a daily basis.\n\nToys, like play itself, serve multiple purposes in both humans and animals. They provide entertainment while fulfilling an educational role. Toys enhance cognitive behavior and stimulate creativity. They aid in the development of physical and mental skills which are necessary in later life.\n\nOne of the simplest toys, a set of simple wooden blocks is also one of the best toys for developing minds. Andrew Witkin, director of marketing for Mega Brands told Investor's Business Daily that, \"They help develop hand-eye coordination, math and science skills and also let kids be creative.\" Other toys like marbles, jackstones, and balls serve similar functions in child development, allowing children to use their minds and bodies to learn about spatial relationships, cause and effect, and a wide range of other skills.\nOne example of the dramatic ways that toys can influence child development involves clay sculpting toys such as Play-Doh and Silly Putty and their home-made counterparts. Mary Ucci, Educational Director of the Child Study Center of Wellesley College, has demonstrated how such toys positively impact the physical development, cognitive development, emotional development, and social development of children.\n\nToys for infants often make use of distinctive sounds, bright colors, and unique textures. Through play with toys infants begin to recognize shapes and colors. Repetition reinforces memory. Play-Doh, Silly Putty and other hands-on materials allow the child to make toys of their own.\n\nEducational toys for school age children of often contain a puzzle, problem-solving technique, or mathematical proposition. Often toys designed for older audiences, such as teenagers or adults, demonstrate advanced concepts. Newton's cradle, a desk toy designed by Simon Prebble, demonstrates the conservation of momentum and energy.\n\nNot all toys are appropriate for all ages of children. Even some toys which are marketed for a specific age range can even harm the development of children in that range.\n\n\"Age compression\" is a toy industry term that describes the modern trend of children moving through play stages faster than they did in the past. Children have a desire to progress to more complex toys at a faster pace, girls in particular. Barbie dolls, for example, were once marketed to girls around 8 years old but have been found to be more popular in recent years with girls around 3 years old. The packaging for the dolls labels them appropriate for ages 3 and up. Boys, in contrast, apparently enjoy toys and games over a longer timespan, gravitating towards toys that meet their interest in assembling and disassembling mechanical toys, and toys that \"move fast and things that fight\". An industry executive points out that girls have entered the \"tween\" phase by the time they are 8 years old and want non-traditional toys, whereas boys have been maintaining an interest in traditional toys until they are 12 years old, meaning the traditional toy industry holds onto their boy customers for 50% longer than their girl customers.\n\nGirls gravitate towards \"music, clothes, make-up, television talent shows and celebrities\". As young children are more exposed to and drawn to music intended for older children and teens, companies are having to rethink how they develop and market their products. Girls also demonstrate a longer loyalty to characters in toys and games marketed towards them. A variety of global toy companies have marketed themselves to this aspect of girls' development, for example, the Hello Kitty brand, and the Disney Princess franchise. Boys have shown an interest in computer games at an ever-younger age in recent years.\n\nCertain toys, such as Barbie dolls and toy soldiers, are often perceived as being more acceptable for one gender than the other. The turning point for the addition of gender to toys came about in the 1960s and 1970s. Before 1975, only about two percent of toys were labeled by gender, whereas today on the Disney store's website, considered a dominating global force for toys by researcher Claire Miller, all toys are labeled by gender. The journal \"Sex Roles\" began publishing research on this topic in 1975, focusing on the effects of gender in youth. Too, many psychological textbooks began to address this new issue. Along with these publications, researchers also started to challenge the ideas of male and female as being opposites, even going as far as to claim toys which have characteristics of both gender are preferable.\n\nA milestone for research on gender is the use of meta-analysis, which provides a way to assess patterns in a systematic way, which is especially relevant for a topic such as gender, which can be difficult to quantify. Nature and nurture have historically been analyzed when looking at gender in play, as well as reinforcement by peers and parents of typical gender roles and consequently, gender play. Toy companies have often promoted the segregation by gender in toys because it enables them to customize the same toy for each gender, which ultimately doubles their revenue. For example, Legos added more colors to certain sets of toys in the 1990s, including colors commonly attributed to girls such as lavender.\n\nIt has been noted by researchers that, \"Children as young as 18 months display sex-stereotyped toy choices\". When eye movement is tracked in young infants, infant girls show a visual preference for a doll over a toy truck (d > 1.0). Boys showed no preference for the truck over the doll. However, they did fixate on the truck more than the girls (d = .78). This small study suggests that even before any self-awareness of gender identity has emerged, children already prefer sex-typical toys. These differences in toy choice are well established within the child by the age of three.\n\nAnother study done by Jeffrey Trawick-Smith took 60 different children ages three to four and observed them playing with nine different toys deemed best for development. They were allowed to play with the toys in a typical environment, a preschool classroom, which allowed for the results to be more authentic compared to research done in a lab. The researchers then quantified play quality of the children with each toy based on factors such as learning, problem solving, curiosity, creativity, imagination, and peer interaction. The results revealed that boys generally received higher scores for overall play quality than girls, and the toys with the best play quality were those identified as the most gender neutral, such as building blocks and bricks along with pieces modeling people. Trawick-Smith then concluded that the study encourages a focus on toys which are beneficial to both genders in order to create a better balance.\n\nWhile some parents promote gender neutral play, many parents encourage their sons and daughters to participate in sex-typed activities, including doll playing and engaging in housekeeping activities for girls and playing with trucks and engaging in sports activities for boys.\nResearcher Susan Witt said that parents are the primary influencer on the gender roles of their children. Parents, siblings, peers, and even teachers have been shown to react more positively to children engaging in sex-typical behavior and playing with sex-typical toys. This is often done through encouragement or discouragement, as well as suggestions and imitation. Additionally, sons are more likely to be reinforced for sex-typical play and discouraged from atypical play. However, it is generally not as looked down upon for females to play with toys designed \"for boys\", an activity which has also become more common in recent years. Fathers are also more likely to reinforce typical play and discourage atypical play than mothers are. A study done by researcher Susan Witt suggests that stereotypes are oftentimes only strengthened by the environment, which perpetuates them to linger in older life.\n\nThis stereotypical attribution of sex-typical toys for girls and boys is gradually changing, with toys companies creating more gender neutral toys, as the benefits associated with allowing children to play with toys that appeal to them far outweighs controlling their individual preferences. For example, many stores are beginning to change their gender labels on children's play items. Target removed all identification related to gender from their toy aisles and Disney did the same for their costumes. The Disney store is an especially prevalent example of gender in play because they are a global identity in the toy world. A study done regarding their website found that though they have removed gender labels from their costumes, the toys online reflect more stereotypical gender identities. For example, males were associated with physicality and females were associated with beauty, housing, and caring. Too, though they promote their toys as being for both genders, there is no section for boys and girls combined on their website. Those which are generally deemed for both genders more closely resemble what many would label \"boy toys,\" as they relate closer to the stereotype of masculinity within play.\n\nTraditions within various cultures promote the passing down of certain toys to their children based on the child's gender. In South American Indian communities, boys receive a toy bow and arrow from their father while young girls receive a toy basket from their mother. In North African and Saharan cultural communities, gender plays a role in the creation of self-made dolls. While female dolls are used to represent brides, mothers, and wives, male dolls are used to represent horsemen and warriors. This contrast stems from the various roles of men and women within the Saharan and North African communities. There are differences in the toys that are intended for girls and boys within various cultures, which is reflective of the differing roles of men and women within a specific cultural community.\n\nResearch on the repercussions of gender in toys suggests that play should be encouraged to be more gender neutral in order to work towards a desegregation of the genders. Too, researcher Carol Auster and Claire Mansbach promote that allowing children to play with toys which more closely fit their talents would help them to better develop their skills. In terms of parental influence, a study found that parents who demonstrated some androgynous behavior have higher scores in support, warmth, and self-worth in regards to the treatment of their children. Even as this debate is evolving and children are becoming more inclined to cross barriers in terms of gender with their toys, girls are typically more encouraged to do so than boys because of the societal value of masculinity.\n\nWith toys comprising such a large and important part of human existence, it makes sense that the toy industry would have a substantial economic impact. Sales of toys often increase around holidays where gift-giving is a tradition. Some of these holidays include Christmas, Easter, Saint Nicholas Day, and Three Kings Day.\n\nIn 2005, toy sales in the United States totaled about $22.9 billion. Money spent on children between the ages of 8 and twelve alone totals approximately $221 million annually in the U.S. It was estimated that in 2011, 88% of toy sales was in the age group 0–11 years.\n\nToy companies change and adapt their toys to meet the changing demands of children thereby gaining a larger share of the substantial market. In recent years many toys have become more complicated with flashing lights and sounds in an effort to appeal to children raised around television and the internet. According to Mattel's president, Neil Friedman, \"Innovation is key in the toy industry and to succeed one must create a 'wow' moment for kids by designing toys that have fun, innovative features and include new technologies and engaging content.\"\n\nIn an effort to reduce costs, many mass-producers of toys locate their factories in areas where wages are lower. China manufactures about 70 percent of the world’s toys and is home to more than 8,000 toy firms, most of which are located in the Pearl River Delta of Guangdong Province. 75% of all toys sold in the U.S., for example, are manufactured in China. Issues and events such as power outages, supply of raw materials, supply of labor, and raising wages that impact areas where factories are located often have an enormous impact on the toy industry in importing countries.\n\nMany traditional toy makers have been losing sales to video game makers for years. Because of this, some traditional toy makers have entered the field of electronic games and even turning audio games into toys, and are enhancing the brands that they have by introducing interactive extensions or internet connectivity to their current toys.\n\nIn addition, the rise of distributed manufacturing enables consumers to make their own toys from open source designs with a 3-D printer. As of 2017 consumers were already offsetting 10s of millions of dollars per year by 3D printing their own toys from MyMiniFactory, a single repository.\n\nThe Greek philosopher Plato wrote that the future architect should play at building houses as a child. A construction set is a collection of separate pieces that can be joined together to create models. Popular models to make include cars, spaceships, and houses. The things that are built are sometimes used as toys once completed, but generally speaking, the object is to build things of one's own design, and old models often are broken up and the pieces reused in new models.\n\nThe oldest and, perhaps most common construction toy is a set of simple wooden blocks, which are often painted in bright colors and given to babies and toddlers. Construction sets such as Lego bricks and Lincoln Logs are designed for slightly older children and have been quite popular in the last century.\nConstruction sets appeal to children (and adults) who like to work with their hands, puzzle solvers, and imaginative sorts.\n\nSome other examples include Bayko, Konstruk-Tubes, K'Nex, Erector Sets, Tinkertoys, and Meccano, and generic construction toys such as Neodymium magnet toys.\n\nA doll is a model of a human (often a baby), a humanoid (like Bert and Ernie), or an animal. Modern dolls are often made of cloth or plastic. Other materials that are, or have been, used in the manufacture of dolls include cornhusks, bone, stone, wood, porcelain (sometimes called china), bisque, celluloid, wax, and even apples. Often people will make dolls out of whatever materials are available to them.\n\nSometimes intended as decorations, keepsakes, or collectibles for older children and adults, most dolls are intended as toys for children, usually girls, to play with. Dolls have been found in Egyptian tombs which date to as early as 2000 BCE.\n\nDolls are usually miniatures, but baby dolls may be of true size and weight. A doll or stuffed animal of soft material is sometimes called a plush toy or plushie. A popular toy of this type is the Teddy Bear.\n\nA distinction is often made between dolls and action figures, which are generally of plastic or semi-metallic construction and poseable to some extent, and often are merchandising from television shows or films which feature the characters. Modern action figures, such as Action Man, are often marketed towards boys, whereas dolls are often marketed towards girls.\n\nToy soldiers, perhaps a precursor to modern action figures, have been a popular toy for centuries. They allow children to act out battles, often with toy military equipment and a castle or fort. Miniature animal figures are also widespread, with children perhaps acting out farm activities with animals and equipment centered on a toy farm.\n\nChildren have played with miniature versions of vehicles since ancient times, with toy two-wheeled carts being depicted on ancient Greek vases. Wind-up toys have also played a part in the advancement of toy vehicles. Modern equivalents include toy cars such as those produced by Matchbox or Hot Wheels, miniature aircraft, toy boats, military vehicles, and trains. Examples of the latter range from wooden sets for younger children such as BRIO to more complicated realistic train models like those produced by Lionel, Doepke and Hornby. Larger die-cast vehicles, 1:18 scale, have become popular toys; these vehicles are produced with a great attention to detail.\n\nA puzzle is a problem or enigma that challenges ingenuity. Solutions to puzzle may require recognizing patterns and creating a particular order. People with a high inductive reasoning aptitude may be better at solving these puzzles than others. Puzzles based on the process of inquiry and discovery to complete may be solved faster by those with good deduction skills. A popular puzzle toy is the Rubik's Cube, invented by Hungarian Ernő Rubik in 1974. Popularized in the 1980s, solving the cube requires planning and problem-solving skills and involves algorithms.\n\nThere are many different types of puzzles, for example a maze is a type of tour puzzle. Other categories include; construction puzzles, stick puzzles, tiling puzzles, disentanglement puzzles, sliding puzzles, logic puzzles, picture puzzles, lock puzzles and mechanical puzzles.\n\nSome toys, such as Beanie Babies, attract large numbers of enthusiasts, eventually becoming collectibles. Other toys, such as Boyds Bears are marketed to adults as collectibles. Some people spend large sums of money in an effort to acquire larger and more complete collections. The record for a single Pez dispenser at auction, for example, is US$1100.\n\nMany successful films, television programs, books and sport teams have official merchandise, which often includes related toys. Some notable examples are \"Star Wars\" (a space fantasy franchise) and Arsenal, an English football club.\n\nPromotional toys can fall into any of the other toy categories; for example they can be dolls or action figures based on the characters of movies or professional athletes, or they can be balls, yo-yos, and lunch boxes with logos on them. Sometimes they are given away for free as a form of advertising. Model aircraft are often toys that are used by airlines to promote their brand, just as toy cars and trucks and model trains are used by trucking, railroad and other companies as well. Many food manufacturers run promotions where a toy is included with the main product as a prize. Toys are also used as premiums, where consumers redeem proofs of purchase from a product and pay shipping and handling fees to get the toy. Some people go to great lengths to collect these sorts of promotional toys.\n\nDigital toys are toys that incorporate some form of interactive digital technology. Examples of digital toys include virtual pets and handheld electronic games. Among the earliest digital toys are Mattel Auto Race and the Little Professor, both released in 1976. The concept of using technology in a way that bridges the digital with the physical world, providing unique interactive experiences for the user has also been referred to as \"Phygital.\"\n\nA great many toys are part of active play. These include traditional toys such as hoops, tops, jump ropes and balls, as well as more modern toys like Frisbees, foot bags, astrojax, and Myachi.\n\nPlaying with these sorts of toys allows children to exercise, building strong bones and muscles and aiding in physical fitness. Throwing and catching balls and frisbees can improve hand–eye coordination. Jumping rope, (also known as skipping) and playing with foot bags can improve balance.\n\nMany countries have passed safety standards limiting the types of toys that can be sold. Most of these seek to limit potential hazards, such as choking or fire hazards that could cause injury. Children, especially very small ones, often put toys into their mouths, so the materials used to make a toy are regulated to prevent poisoning. Materials are also regulated to prevent fire hazards. Children have not yet learned to judge what is safe and what is dangerous, and parents do not always think of all possible situations, so such warnings and regulations are important on toys.\n\nFor toy safety, every country has its own regulations. But since the globalization and opening of markets, most of them try to harmonize their regulations. The most common action for younger children is to put toys in their mouths. This is why it is of utmost importance to regulate chemicals which are contained in the paintings and other materials children's products are made of. Countries or trade zones such as the European Union regularly publish lists to regulate the quantities or ban chemicals from toys and juvenile products.\n\nThere have also been issues of toy safety regarding lead paint. Some toy factories, when projects become too large for them to handle, outsource production to other less known factories, often in other countries. Recently, there were some in China that America had to send back. The subcontractors may not be watched as closely and sometimes use improper manufacturing methods. The U.S. government, along with mass market stores, is now moving towards requiring companies to submit their products to testing before they end up on shelves.\n\nWhen toys have been outgrown or are no longer wanted, reuse is sometimes considered. They can be donated via many charities such as Goodwill Industries and the Salvation Army, sold at garage sales, auctioned, sometimes even donated to museums. However, when toys are broken, worn out or otherwise unfit for use, care should be taken when disposing of them. Donated or resold toys should be gently used, clean and have all parts. Before disposal of any battery-operated toy, batteries should be removed and recycled; some communities demand this be done. Some manufacturers, such as Little Tikes, will take back and recycle their products.\n\nIn 2007, massive recalls of toys produced in China led many U.S.-based charities to cut back on, or even discontinue, their acceptance of used toys. Goodwill stopped accepting donations of any toys except stuffed animals, and other charities checked all toys against government-issued checklists.\n\nThe WEEE directive (Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment), which aims at increasing re-use and recycling and reducing electronic waste, applies to toys in the United Kingdom as of 2 January 2007.\n\nIt is not unusual for some animals to play with toys. An example of this is a dolphin being trained to nudge a ball through a hoop. Young chimpanzees use sticks as dolls – the social aspect is seen by the fact that young females more often use a stick this way than young male chimpanzees. They carry their chosen stick and put it in their nest. Such behaviour is also seen in some adult female chimpanzees, but never after they have become mothers.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "150113", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=150113", "title": "Cannabis edible", "text": "Cannabis edible\n\nA cannabis edible, also known as a cannabis-infused food or simply an edible, is a food product that contains cannabinoids, especially tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). Although \"edible\" may refer to either a food or a drink, a cannabis-infused drink may be referred to more specifically as a liquid edible or drinkable.\n\nMost edibles contain a significant amount of THC, which can induce a wide range of effects, including relaxation, euphoria, increased appetite, fatigue, and anxiety. THC-dominant edibles are consumed for recreational and medical purposes. Some edibles contain a negligible amount of THC and are instead dominant in other cannabinoids, most commonly cannabidiol (CBD). These edibles are primarily used for medical purposes only.\n\nFoods and beverages made from non-psychoactive cannabis products are known as hemp foods.\n\nThe earliest recorded cannabis-infused food was in the Indian subcontinent, where people have prepared food and drink with bhang for millennia, for both spiritual and medicinal purposes. The oil-solubility of cannabis extracts was also known to ancient Indians, with Sanskrit recipes requiring cannabis to be sautéed in ghee before mixing it with other ingredients.\n\nBhang has been used in food and drink as early as 1,000 BCE by Hindus in the Indian subcontinent. Bhang is traditionally distributed during the Hindu spring festival of Holi.\n\nModern interest in cannabis-infused food is credited to the publication of \"The Alice B. Toklas Cook Book\". Toklas included a recipe for \"haschich fudge\", which was contributed by artist and friend Brion Gysin when the book was published in 1954. Although it was omitted from the first American editions, Toklas' name and her \"brownies\" became synonymous with cannabis in the growing 1960s counterculture.\n\nIn some U.S. states that have legalized cannabis, edibles have experienced a dramatic rise in sales. However, there is growing concern about the danger edibles pose to children and inexperienced cannabis consumers, who may easily ingest too much at once, possibly not even realizing the food has been infused. Furthermore, calls to poison control have dramatically increased since 2008 due to dogs ingesting edibles.\n\nCannabis does not naturally contain significant amounts of THC. Rather, it contains high levels of tetrahydrocannabinolic acid (THCA), which converts into THC through decarboxylation, a process induced by heating.\n\nComparing effects of eating cannabis products and smoking them is difficult because there are large margins of error due to variability in how different people smoke, with the number, duration, and spacing of puffs, the hold time and the volume of the person's lungs all affecting the dosing. With regard to eating, different vehicles in which cannabinoids are dissolved for oral intake affect the availability of the cannabinoids, and different people metabolize differently. Generally, however, because oral doses are processed by the digestive system and the liver before entering the bloodstream, cannabinoids that are ingested are absorbed more slowly and have delayed and lower peak concentrations, and are cleared more slowly, compared to inhaling them in the aerosol that is formed when cannabis is burnt. Oral administration generally leads to two peaks of concentration, due to enterohepatic circulation.\n\nConsuming THC through ingestion results in absorption through the liver and, through metabolic processes, the conversion of a significant proportion of it into 11-Hydroxy-THC.\n\nA cannabis-infused baked good is a common type of cannabis edible. Popular varieties include hash cookies, pot brownies, and space cakes.\n\nOne is not usually able to distinguish between regular baked goods and those containing cannabinoids before consumption, but they tend to have a slightly green tinge and they often emit a faint cannabis smell. A mild grassy or cannabis flavor might be detectable if sufficient quantities are used. Many resources for recipes, preparation, and dosage are available online, though they vary greatly in effectiveness and quality.\n\nA cannabis-infused drink, also known as a liquid edible or drinkable, is a drink that has been infused with cannabinoids.\n\nTraditional cannabis-infused drinks include the Indian drinks lassi and thandai when prepared with bhang. Cannabis tea is a mildly psychoactive herbal tea but is psychoactively weak due to the lack of fat and alcohol in the drink.\n\nIn U.S. states that have legalized cannabis for recreational use, drinks were about 4% of the cannabis market in 2014 but had fallen to around 1.5% of the market in 2016.\n\nA capsule containing THC or CBD that is not sold as a regulated pharmaceutical is also considered an edible and provides the same effect as food and drink.\n\nCannabis tincture is an alcoholic extract of cannabis. Because cannabis resins are soluble in alcohol, an effective way of adding them into dishes is through cooking brandy or rum infused with cannabinoids. Generally, stems and leaves of the marijuana plant are used due to their lower THC content when smoked. When infused in high-proof grain-based alcohol, such as Everclear, it becomes what is commonly known as \"green dragon\". \"Creme de Gras\" (a play on the English \"grass\", as \"creme de gras\" translates literally as \"cream of fat\") is a flavored liqueur made from cannabis. It can be added to coffee and other beverages.\n\nCannabis oil is a product based in a cooking oil that has been infused with cannabinoids by mixing cannabis with the heated oil. Cannabis cooking oils are available to medical cannabis patients in a variety of blends for various cooking applications.\n\nCannabis-infused butter, or cannabutter, is a cannabis-infused ingredient used in many cannabis edibles. Heating the raw cannabis in melted butter allows the cannabinoids to be extracted by the fat. A more complicated process is using a double-boiler, or slow cooker, cheesecloth or tea strainer and funnel.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "151496", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=151496", "title": "Cheeseburger", "text": "Cheeseburger\n\nA cheeseburger is a hamburger topped with cheese. Traditionally, the slice of cheese is placed on top of the meat patty, but the burger can include variations in structure, ingredients and composition. The cheese is typically added to the cooking hamburger patty shortly before serving, which allows the cheese to melt. As with other hamburgers, a cheeseburger may include toppings, such as lettuce, tomato, onion, pickles, bacon, mayonnaise, ketchup, mustard or other toppings. \n\nIn fast food restaurants, the cheese used is usually processed cheese, but any other meltable cheeses may be used. Common examples include cheddar, Swiss, mozzarella, blue Cheese, and pepper jack. \n\nBy the late nineteenth century, the opening of the vast grasslands of the Great Plains to cattle ranching had made it possible for many Americans to consume beef almost daily. The hamburger was, and remains, one of the cheapest sources of beef in America.\n\nAdding cheese to hamburgers became popular in the late-1920s to mid-1930s, and there are several competing claims as to who created the first cheeseburger. Lionel Sternberger is reputed to have introduced the cheeseburger in 1926 at the age of 16 when he was working as a fry cook at his father's Pasadena, California sandwich shop, \"The Rite Spot\", and \"experimentally dropped a slab of American cheese on a sizzling hamburger.\"\n\nAn early example of the cheeseburger appearing on a menu is a 1928 menu for the Los Angeles restaurant O'Dell's which listed a cheeseburger smothered with chili for 25 cents.\n\nOther restaurants also claim to have invented the cheeseburger. For example, Kaelin's Restaurant in Louisville, Kentucky, said it invented the cheeseburger in 1934. One year later, a trademark for the name \"cheeseburger\" was awarded to Louis Ballast of the Humpty Dumpty Drive-In in Denver, Colorado. According to Steak 'n Shake archives, the restaurant's founder, Gus Belt, applied for a trademark on the word in the 1930s.\n\nThe steamed cheeseburger, a variation almost exclusively served in central Connecticut, is believed to have been invented at a restaurant called Jack’s Lunch in Middletown, Connecticut, in the 1930s.\n\nThe largest cheeseburger ever made in the world weighed 2,014 pounds (914 kg), \"60 pounds [27 kg] of bacon, 50 pounds [22.5 kg] of lettuce, 50 pounds [22.5 kg] of sliced onions, 40 pounds [18 kg] of pickles, and 40 pounds [18 kg] of cheese.\" The record was broken by Minnesota's Black Bear Casino breaking the previous Cheeseburger record 881 pounds (400 kg).\n\nIn the United States, National Cheeseburger Day is celebrated annually on 18 September.\n\nThe ingredients used to create cheeseburgers follow similar patterns found in the regional variations of hamburgers, although most start with ground beef. Common cheeses used for topping are American, swiss, and other meltable cheeses. Popular toppings include lettuce, tomato, onion, pickles, bacon, avocado or guacamole, sliced sautéed mushrooms or onions, cheese sauce and/or chili, but the variety of possible toppings is broad. \n\nA cheeseburger may have more than one patty and/or more than one slice of cheese—it is reasonably common, but by no means automatic, for the number to increase at the same rate with cheese and meat interleaved. A stack of two or more patties follows the same basic pattern as hamburgers: with two patties will be called a double cheeseburger; a triple cheeseburger has three, and while much less common, a quadruple has four.\n\nSometimes cheeseburgers are prepared with the cheese enclosed within the ground beef, rather than on top. This is sometimes known as a Jucy Lucy.\n\nTraditionally, this dish breaches the kosher laws (; \"kashrut\") observed by Judaism as it combines ground beef and cheese. Mixtures of milk and meat (, \"basar bechalav\", literally \"meat in milk\") are prohibited according to Jewish religious law (; \"halakha\"), following a verse in the Book of Exodus in which Jews are forbidden from \"boiling a (kid) goat in its mother's milk\" (\"Exod. 34:26\"). This prohibition appears again in Deuteronomy. This dietary law sparked controversy in Jerusalem when McDonald's began opening franchises there that sold cheeseburgers. Since that time, McDonald's has opened both kosher and non-kosher restaurants in Israel.\n\nIn an attempt to provide a \"kosher cheeseburger\", a kosher restaurant in New York City created a controversial cheeseburger variation which replaces cheese with soy cheese.\n\n"}
{"id": "151501", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=151501", "title": "Jelly bean", "text": "Jelly bean\n\nJelly beans are small bean-shaped sugar candies with soft candy shells and thick gel interiors. The confection is sold in a wide variety of colors and flavors, and is made primarily of sugar.\n\nIt has been claimed that jelly beans were first mentioned during 1861, when Boston confectioner William Schrafft urged people to send his jelly beans to soldiers during the American Civil War. It was not until July 5, 1905, that jelly beans were mentioned in the \"Chicago Daily News\". The advertisement publicized bulk jelly beans sold by volume for nine cents per pound, according to the book \"The Century in Food: America's Fads and Favorites\". Most historians contend that jelly beans were first associated with celebrations of Easter in the United States sometime during the 1930s due to their egg-like shape.\n\nThe basic ingredients of jelly beans include sugar, tapioca or corn syrup, and pectin or starch. Relatively minor amounts of the emulsifying agent lecithin, anti-foaming agents, an edible wax such as carnauba wax or beeswax, salt, and confectioner's glaze are also included. The ingredients that give each bean its character are also relatively small in proportion and may vary depending on the flavor.\n\nMost jelly beans are sold as an assortment of about eight different flavors, most of them fruit-based. Assortments of \"spiced\" jellybeans and gumdrops are also available, which include a similar number of spice and mint flavors. The colors of jelly beans often correspond with a fruit and a \"spiced\" flavor.\n\nSome premium brands, such as Jelly Belly and The Jelly Bean Factory, are available in many different flavors, including berry, tropical fruit, soft drink, popcorn, licorice, and novelty ranges, in addition to the familiar fruit and spice flavors. While these are also sold as assortments, individual flavors can be purchased from distributors.\n\nIn United States slang during the 1910s and early 1920s, a \"Jellybean\" or \"Jelly-Bean\" was a young man who dressed stylishly but had little else to recommend him, similar to the older terms \"dandy\" and \"fop\". F. Scott Fitzgerald published a story about such a character, \"The Jelly-Bean,\" during 1920. In William Faulkner's 1929 novel \"The Sound and the Fury\", Jason complained about his niece Quentin's promiscuity, remarking that even \"the town jellybeans\" gave her the \"go-by\".\n\nThe song \"Jelly Bean (He's a Curbstone Cutie)\" was made popular during the 1940s by Phil Harris. It was written by Jimmie Dupre, Sam Rosen, and Joe Verges and published in New Orleans during 1920 by Universal Music Publishers, Inc.\n\nWhen Beatlemania broke out in 1963, fans of The Beatles in the US pelted the band with jelly beans (emulating fans in the UK who threw the British candy Jelly Babies at George Harrison who reportedly liked eating them).\n"}
{"id": "151513", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=151513", "title": "Candy corn", "text": "Candy corn\n\nCandy corn is a candy most often found in the United States and Canada, popular primarily around Halloween. The three colors of the candy – a broad yellow end, a tapered orange center, and a pointed white tip – mimic the appearance of kernels of corn, hence the name. Each piece is approximately three times the size of a real kernel from a ripe or dried ear.\n\nCandy corn is made primarily from sugar, corn syrup, confectioner's wax, artificial coloring and binders.\n\n\"Chicken Feed\" was the original name of the candy with production starting in the 1880s. Wunderlee Candy Company was the first to produce the candy. Following the 19th century, the Goelitz Confectionary Company (now called Jelly Belly) manufactured the product. Along with other agriculture-inspired treats at the time, the late 19th century, America's confectioners sought to market candy corn to a largely rural society.\n\nCandy corn is a staple of the Fall season and Halloween holiday in the United States of America. The taste of candy corn can be described as somewhat polarizing, and has been a subject of wide debate.\n\nThe National Confectioners Association estimates that 35 million pounds (over 9000 metric tons) of candy corn are sold annually.\n\nOriginally the candy was made by hand. Manufacturers first combined sugar, corn syrup, carnauba wax, and water and cooked them to form a slurry. Fondant was added for texture and marshmallows were added to provide a soft bite. The final mixture was then heated and poured into shaped molds. Three passes, one for each colored section, were required during the pouring process.\n\nThe recipe remains basically the same today. The production method, called \"corn starch modeling,\" likewise remains the same, though tasks initially performed by hand were soon taken over by machines invented for the purpose. As of 2016, annual production in the United States is 35 million pounds, or almost 9 billion pieces of candy.\n\nA popular variation called \"Indian corn\" features a chocolate brown wide end, orange center and pointed white tip, often available around Thanksgiving. During the Halloween season, blackberry cobbler candy corn can be found in eastern Canada. Confectioners have introduced additional color variations suited to other holidays. The Christmas variant (sometimes called \"reindeer corn\") typically has a red end and a green center; the Valentine's Day variant (sometimes called \"cupid corn\") typically has a red end and a pink center; In the United States during Independence Day celebrations, corn with a blue end, white center, and red tip (named \"freedom corn\") can be found at celebratory cook outs and patriotic celebrations; the Easter variant (sometimes called \"bunny corn\") is typically only a two-color candy, and comes with a variety of pastel bases (pink, green, yellow, and purple) with white tips all in one package. In 2011, there were caramel apple and green apple candy corn variants. In 2013 there were s'mores and pumpkin spice variants. In 2014, carrot corn was also introduced for the Easter season, typically being green and orange, and having a carrot cake type flavor. In 2015, birthday cake and \"celebration\" candy corn have been introduced for the Independence Day season.\n\n"}
{"id": "151830", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=151830", "title": "Homograph", "text": "Homograph\n\nA homograph (from the , \"homós\", \"same\" and γράφω, \"gráphō\", \"write\") is a word that shares the same written form as another word but has a different meaning. However, some dictionaries insist that the words must also sound different, while the Oxford English Dictionary says that the words should also be of \"different origin\". In this vein, \"The Oxford Guide to Practical Lexicography\" lists various types of homographs, including those in which the words are discriminated by being in a different \"word class\", such as \"hit\", the verb \"to strike\", and \"hit\" the noun \"a blow\".\n\nIf, when spoken, the meanings may be distinguished by different pronunciations, the words are also heteronyms. Words with the same writing \"and\" pronunciation (i.e. are both homographs and homophones) are considered homonyms. However, in a looser sense the term \"homonym\" may be applied to words with the same writing \"or\" pronunciation. Homograph disambiguation is critically important in speech synthesis, natural language processing and other fields. Identically written different senses of what is judged to be fundamentally the \"same\" word are called polysemes; for example, \"wood\" (substance) and \"wood\" (area covered with trees).\n\nExamples:\nwhere the two words are spelt identically but pronounced differently. Here confusion is not possible in spoken language but could occur in written language.\n\nwhere the words are identical in spelling and pronunciation, but differ in meaning and grammatical function. These are called homonyms.\n\nMany Chinese varieties have homographs, called () or (), ().\n\nModern study of Old Chinese has found patterns that suggest a system of affixes. One pattern is the addition of the prefix , which turns transitive verbs into intransitive or passives in some cases:\n\nAnother pattern is the use of a suffix, which seems to create nouns from verbs or verbs from nouns:\nMany homographs in Old Chinese also exist in Middle Chinese. Examples of homographs in Middle Chinese are:\nMany homographs in Old Chinese and Middle Chinese also exist in modern Chinese varieties. Homographs which did not exist in Old Chinese or Middle Chinese often come into existence due to differences between literary and colloquial readings of Chinese characters. Other homographs may have been created due to merging two different characters into the same glyph during script reform (See Simplified Chinese characters and Shinjitai).\n\nSome examples of homographs in Cantonese from Middle Chinese are:\n"}
{"id": "151831", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=151831", "title": "Homophone", "text": "Homophone\n\nA homophone is a word that is pronounced the same (to varying extent) as another word but differs in meaning. A homophone may also differ in spelling. The two words may be spelled the same, such as \"rose\" (flower) and \"rose\" (past tense of \"rise\"), or differently, such as \"carat\", and \"carrot\", or \"to\", \"two\", and \"too\". The term \"homophone\" may also apply to units longer or shorter than words, such as phrases, letters, or groups of letters which are pronounced the same as another phrase, letter, or group of letters. Any unit with this property is said to be \"homophonous\".\n\nHomophones that are spelled the same are also both homographs and homonyms.\n\nHomophones that are spelled differently are also called heterographs.\n\n\"Homophone\" derives from the Greek \"homo-\"  (ὁμο‑), \"same\", and \"phōnḗ\" (φωνή), \"voice, utterance\".\n\nHomophones are often used to create puns and to deceive the reader (as in crossword puzzles) or to suggest multiple meanings. The last usage is common in poetry and creative literature. An example of this is seen in Dylan Thomas's radio play \"Under Milk Wood\": \"The shops in mourning\" where \"mourning\" can be heard as \"mourning\" or \"morning\". Another vivid example is Thomas Hood's use of \"birth\" and \"berth\" and \"told\" and \"toll'd\" (tolled) in his poem \"Faithless Sally Brown\":\n\nIn some accents, various sounds have merged in that they are no longer distinctive, and thus words that differ only by those sounds in an accent that maintains the distinction (a minimal pair) are homophonous in the accent with the merger. Some examples from English are:\n\nWordplay is particularly common in English because the multiplicity of linguistic influences offers considerable complication in spelling and meaning and pronunciation compared with other languages.\n\nMalapropisms, which often create a similar comic effect, are usually near-homophones. See also Eggcorn.\n\nHomophones of multiple words or phrases (as sometimes seen in word games) are also known as \"oronyms\". This term was coined by Gyles Brandreth and first published in his book \"The Joy of Lex\" (1980), and it was used in the BBC programme \"Never Mind the Full Stops\", which also featured Brandreth as a guest.\n\nExamples of \"oronyms\" (which may only be true homophones in certain dialects of English) include:\n\nIn his Appalachian comedy routine, American comedian Jeff Foxworthy frequently uses oronyms which play on exaggerated \"country\" accents. Notable examples include:\n\nThere are sites, for example, this archived page, which have lists of homonyms or rather homophones and even 'multinyms' which have as many as seven spellings. There are differences in such lists due to dialect pronunciations and usage of old words. In English, there are approximately 88 triples; 24 quadruples; 2 quintuples; 1 sextet and 1 septet. The septet is:\n\nOther than the three common words (\"raise\", \"rays\" and \"raze\"), there are:\n\n\nIf proper names are allowed then a nonet is \"Ayr\" (Scottish town), \"Aire\" (Yorkshire River), \"Eyre\" (legal term and various geographic locations), \"heir\", \"air\", \"err\" (some speakers), \"ere\" (poetic \"before\"), \"e'er\" (poetic \"ever\", some speakers), \"are\" (unit of area; some speakers).\n\nThere are a large number of homophones in Japanese, due to the use of Sino-Japanese vocabulary, where borrowed words and morphemes from Chinese are widely used in Japanese, but many sound differences, such as words' tones, are lost. These are to some extent disambiguated via Japanese pitch accent, or from context, but many of these words are primarily or almost exclusively used in writing, where they are easily distinguished as they are written with different kanji; others are used for puns, which are frequent in Japanese. An extreme example is \"kikō\", which is the pronunciation of at least 22 words (some quite rare or specialized, others common; all these examples are two-character compounds), including: 機構 (organization/mechanism), 紀行 (travelogue), 稀覯 (rare), 騎行 (horseback riding), 貴校 ((school (respectful)), 奇功 (outstanding achievement), 貴公 (word for \"you\" used by men addressing male equals or inferiors), 起稿 (draft), 奇行 (eccentricity), 機巧 (contrivance), 寄港 (stopping at port), 帰校 (returning to school), 気功 (breathing exercise/qigong), 寄稿 (contribute an article/written piece), 機甲 (armor, e.g. of a tank), 帰航 (homeward voyage), 奇効 (remarkable effect), 季候 (season/climate), 気孔 (stoma), 起工 (setting to work), 気候 (climate), 帰港 (returning to port).\n\nThe Korean language contains a combination of words that strictly belong to Korean and words that are loanwords from Chinese. Due to Chinese being pronounced with varying tones and Korean's removal of those tones, and because the modern Korean writing system, Hangeul, has a more finite number of phonemes than, for example, Latin-derived alphabets such as that of English, there is a large number of homonyms with both same spelling and pronunciation. For example, \": 'to put on makeup' and \": 'to cremate'. Also, \": 'inheritance' and \": 'miscarriage'. \": 'fart', and \": 'guard'. '밤[밤ː]': 'chestnut', and '밤': 'night'. There are heterographs, but far fewer, contrary to the tendency in English. For example, '학문(學問)': 'learning', and '항문(肛門)': 'anus'. Using hanja (), which are Chinese characters, such words are written differently. \n\nImplicit above, like in other languages, Korean homonyms can be used to make puns. The context in which the word is used indicates which meaning is intended by the speaker or writer.\n\nPseudo-homophones are pseudowords that are phonetically identical to a word. For example, groan/grone and crane/crain are pseudo-homophone pairs, whereas plane/plain is a homophone pair since both letter strings are recognised words. Both types of pairs are used in lexical decision tasks to investigate word recognition.\n\nHomophones, specifically heterographs, where one spelling is of a threatening nature and one is not (\"e.g.\" slay/sleigh, war/wore) have been used in studies of anxiety as a test of cognitive models that those with high anxiety tend to interpret ambiguous information in a threatening manner.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "152509", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=152509", "title": "Metastasis", "text": "Metastasis\n\nMetastasis is a pathogenic agent's spread from an initial or primary site to a different or secondary site within the host's body; it is typically spoken of as such spread by a cancerous tumor. The newly pathological sites, then, are metastases (mets). It is generally distinguished from cancer invasion, which is the direct extension and penetration by cancer cells into neighboring tissues.\n\nCancer occurs after cells are genetically altered to proliferate rapidly and indefinitely. This uncontrolled proliferation by mitosis produces a primary heterogeneic tumour. The cells which constitute the tumor eventually undergo metaplasia, followed by dysplasia then anaplasia, resulting in a malignant phenotype. This malignancy allows for invasion into the circulation, followed by invasion to a second site for tumorigenesis.\n\nSome cancer cells known as circulating tumor cells acquire the ability to penetrate the walls of lymphatic or blood vessels, after which they are able to circulate through the bloodstream to other sites and tissues in the body. This process is known (respectively) as \"lymphatic\" or \"hematogenous\" spread. After the tumor cells come to rest at another site, they re-penetrate the vessel or walls and continue to multiply, eventually forming another clinically detectable tumor. This new tumor is known as a metastatic (or \"secondary\") tumor. Metastasis is one of the hallmarks of cancer, distinguishing it from benign tumors. Most cancers can metastasize, although in varying degrees. Basal cell carcinoma for example rarely metastasizes.\n\nWhen tumor cells metastasize, the new tumor is called a \"secondary\" or \"metastatic\" tumor, and its cells are similar to those in the original or primary tumor. This means that if breast cancer metastasizes to the lungs, the secondary tumor is made up of abnormal breast cells, not of abnormal lung cells. The tumor in the lung is then called \"metastatic breast cancer\", not \"lung cancer\". Metastasis is a key element in cancer staging systems such as the TNM staging system, where it represents the \"M\". In overall stage grouping, metastasis places a cancer in Stage IV. The possibilities of curative treatment are greatly reduced, or often entirely removed, when a cancer has metastasized.\n\nInitially, nearby lymph nodes are struck early. The lungs, liver, brain, and bones are the most common metastasis locations from solid tumors.\n\n\nAlthough advanced cancer may cause pain, it is often not the first symptom.\n\nSome patients, however, do not show any symptoms.\nWhen the organ gets a metastatic disease it begins to shrink until its lymph nodes burst, or undergo lysis.\n\nMetastatic tumors are very common in the late stages of cancer. The spread of metastasis may occur via the blood or the lymphatics or through both routes. The most common places for the metastases to occur are the lungs, liver, brain, and the bones.\n\nMetastasis involves a complex series of steps in which cancer cells leave the original tumor site and migrate to other parts of the body via the bloodstream, via the lymphatic system, or by direct extension. To do so, malignant cells break away from the primary tumor and attach to and degrade proteins that make up the surrounding extracellular matrix (ECM), which separates the tumor from adjoining tissues. By degrading these proteins, cancer cells are able to breach the ECM and escape. The location of the metastases is not always random, with different types of cancer tending to spread to particular organs and tissues at a rate that is higher than expected by statistical chance alone. Breast cancer, for example, tends to metastasize to the bones and lungs. This specificity seems to be mediated by soluble signal molecules such as chemokines and transforming growth factor beta. The body resists metastasis by a variety of mechanisms through the actions of a class of proteins known as metastasis suppressors, of which about a dozen are known.\n\nHuman cells exhibit three kinds of motion: collective motility, mesenchymal-type movement, and amoeboid movement. Cancer cells often opportunistically switch between different kinds of motion. Some cancer researchers hope to find treatments that can stop or at least slow down the spread of cancer by somehow blocking some necessary step in one or more kinds of motion.\n\nCancer researchers studying the conditions necessary for cancer metastasis have discovered that one of the critical events required is the growth of a new network of blood vessels, called tumor angiogenesis. It has been found that angiogenesis inhibitors would therefore prevent the growth of metastases.\n\nSeveral different cell types are critical to tumor growth. In particular, endothelial progenitor cells have been shown to have a strong influence on the growth of tumor blood-vessels. Endothelial progenitor cells are also critical for metastasis and angiogenesis. Endothelial progenitor cells are important in tumor growth, angiogenesis and metastasis, and can be marked using the Inhibitor of DNA Binding 1 (ID1). This novel finding meant that investigators gained the ability to track endothelial progenitor cells from the bone marrow to the blood to the tumor-stroma and even incorporated in tumor vasculature. Endothelial progenitor cells incorporated in tumor vasculature suggests that this cell type in blood-vessel development is important in a tumor setting and metastasis. Furthermore, ablation of the endothelial progenitor cells in the bone marrow can lead to a significant decrease in tumor growth and vasculature development. Therefore, endothelial progenitor cells are important in tumor biology and present novel therapeutic targets.\n\nNFAT transcription factors are implicated in breast cancer, more specifically in the process of cell motility as the basis of metastasis formation. Indeed, NFAT1 (NFATC2) and NFAT5 are pro-invasive and pro-migratory in breast carcinoma and NFAT3 (NFATc4) is an inhibitor of cell motility.\nNFAT1 regulates the expression of the TWEAKR and its ligand TWEAK with the Lipocalin 2 to increase breast-cancer cell invasion and NFAT3 inhibits Lipocalin 2 expression to blunt the cell invasion.\n\nEpigenetic regulation also plays an important role in the metastatic outgrowth of disseminated tumor cells. Metastases display alterations in histone modifications, such as H3K4-methylation and H3K9-methylation, when compared to matching primary tumors. These epigenetic modifications in metastases may allow the proliferation and survival of disseminated tumor cells in distant organs.\n\nA recent study shows that PKC-iota promotes melanoma cell invasion by activating Vimentin during EMT. PKC-iota inhibition or knockdown resulted an increase E-cadherin and RhoA levels while decreasing total Vimentin, phophorylated Vimentin (S39) and Par6 in metastatic melanoma cells. These results suggested that PKC-ι is involved in signaling pathways which upregulate EMT in melanoma thereby directly stimulates metastasis.\nRecently, a series of high-profile experiments suggests that the co-option of intercellular cross-talk mediated by exosome vesicles is a critical factor involved in all steps of the invasion-metastasis cascade.\n\nMetastasis occurs by the following four routes:\n\nThe spread of a malignancy into body cavities can occur via penetrating the surface of the peritoneal, pleural, pericardial, or subarachnoid spaces. For example, ovarian tumors can spread transperitoneally to the surface of the liver.\n\nLymphatic spread allows the transport of tumor cells to regional lymph nodes near the primary tumor and ultimately, to other parts of the body. This is called nodal involvement, positive nodes, or regional disease. \"Positive nodes\" is a term that would be used by medical specialists to describe regional lymph nodes that tested positive for malignancy. It is common medical practice to test by biopsy at least one lymph node near a tumor site when carrying out surgery to examine or remove a tumor. This lymph node is then called a sentinel lymph node.\nLymphatic spread is the most common route of initial metastasis for carcinomas. In contrast, it is uncommon for a sarcoma to metastasize via this route. Localized spread to regional lymph nodes near the primary tumor is not normally counted as a metastasis, although this is a sign of a worse outcome. \nThe lymphatic system does eventually drain from the thoracic duct and right lymphatic duct into the systemic venous system at the venous angle and into the brachiocephalic veins, and therefore these metastatic cells can also eventually spread through the haematogenous route.\n\nThis is typical route of metastasis for sarcomas, but it is also the favored route for certain types of carcinoma, such as renal cell carcinoma originating in the kidney. Because of their thinner walls, veins are more frequently invaded than are arteries, and metastasis tends to follow the pattern of venous flow. That is, hematogenous spread often follows distinct patterns depending on the location of the primary tumor. For example, colorectal cancer spreads primarily through the portal vein to the liver.\n\nSome tumors, especially carcinomas may metastasize along anatomical canalicular spaces. These spaces include for example the bile ducts, the urinary system, the airways and the subarachnoid space. The process is similar to that of transcoelomic spread. However, often it remains unclear whether simultaneously diagnosed tumors of a canalicular system are one metastatic process or in fact independent tumors caused by the same agent (field cancerization).\n\nThere is a propensity for certain tumors to seed in particular organs. This was first discussed as the \"seed and soil\" theory by Stephen Paget in 1889. The propensity for a metastatic cell to spread to a particular organ is termed 'organotropism'. For example, prostate cancer usually metastasizes to the bones. In a similar manner, colon cancer has a tendency to metastasize to the liver. Stomach cancer often metastasises to the ovary in women, then it is called a Krukenberg tumor.\n\nAccording to the \"seed and soil\" theory, it is difficult for cancer cells to survive outside their region of origin, so in order to metastasize they must find a location with similar characteristics. For example, breast tumor cells, which gather calcium ions from breast milk, metastasize to bone tissue, where they can gather calcium ions from bone. Malignant melanoma spreads to the brain, presumably because neural tissue and melanocytes arise from the same cell line in the embryo.\n\nIn 1928, James Ewing challenged the \"seed and soil\" theory and proposed that metastasis occurs purely by anatomic and mechanical routes. This hypothesis has been recently utilized to suggest several hypotheses about the life cycle of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) and to postulate that the patterns of spread could be better understood through a 'filter and flow' perspective. However, contemporary evidences indicate that the primary tumour may dictate organotropic metastases by inducing the formation of pre-metastatic niches at distant sites, where incoming metastatic cells may engraft and colonise. Specifically, exosome vesicles secreted by tumours have been shown to home to pre-metastatic sites, where they activate pro-metastatic processes such as angiogenesis and modify the immune contexture, so as to foster a favourable microenvironment for secondary tumour growth.\n\nIt is theorized that metastasis always coincides with a primary cancer, and, as such, is a tumor that started from a cancer cell or cells in another part of the body. However, over 10% of patients presenting to oncology units will have metastases without a primary tumor found. In these cases, doctors refer to the primary tumor as \"unknown\" or \"occult,\" and the patient is said to have cancer of unknown primary origin (CUP) or unknown primary tumors (UPT). It is estimated that 3% of all cancers are of unknown primary origin. Studies have shown that, if simple questioning does not reveal the cancer's source (coughing up blood—\"probably lung\", urinating blood—\"probably bladder\"), complex imaging will not either. In some of these cases a primary tumor may appear later.\n\nThe use of immunohistochemistry has permitted pathologists to give an identity to many of these metastases. However, imaging of the indicated area only occasionally reveals a primary. In rare cases (e.g., of melanoma), no primary tumor is found, even on autopsy. It is therefore thought that some primary tumors can regress completely, but leave their metastases behind. In other cases, the tumor might just be too small and/or in an unusual location to be diagnosed.\n\nThe cells in a metastatic tumor resemble those in the primary tumor. Once the cancerous tissue is examined under a microscope to determine the cell type, a doctor can usually tell whether that type of cell is normally found in the part of the body from which the tissue sample was taken.\n\nFor instance, breast cancer cells look the same whether they are found in the breast or have spread to another part of the body. So, if a tissue sample taken from a tumor in the lung contains cells that look like breast cells, the doctor determines that the lung tumor is a secondary tumor. Still, the determination of the primary tumor can often be very difficult, and the pathologist may have to use several adjuvant techniques, such as immunohistochemistry, FISH (fluorescent in situ hybridization), and others. Despite the use of techniques, in some cases the primary tumor remains unidentified.\n\nMetastatic cancers may be found at the same time as the primary tumor, or months or years later. When a second tumor is found in a patient that has been treated for cancer in the past, it is more often a metastasis than another primary tumor.\n\nIt was previously thought that most cancer cells have a low metastatic potential and that there are rare cells that develop the ability to metastasize through the development of somatic mutations. According to this theory, diagnosis of metastatic cancers is only possible after the event of metastasis. Traditional means of diagnosing cancer (e.g. a biopsy) would only investigate a subpopulation of the cancer cells and would very likely not sample from the subpopulation with metastatic potential.\n\nThe somatic mutation theory of metastasis development has not been substantiated in human cancers. Rather, it seems that the genetic state of the primary tumor reflects the ability of that cancer to metastasize. Research comparing gene expression between primary and metastatic adenocarcinomas identified a subset of genes whose expression could distinguish primary tumors from metastatic tumors, dubbed a \"metastatic signature.\" Up-regulated genes in the signature include: SNRPF, HNRPAB, DHPS and securin. Actin, myosin and MHC class II down-regulation was also associated with the signature. Additionally, the metastatic-associated expression of these genes was also observed in some primary tumors, indicating that cells with the potential to metastasize could be identified concurrently with diagnosis of the primary tumor. Recent work identified a form of genetic instability in cancer called chromosome instability (CIN) as a driver of metastasis. In aggressive cancer cells, loose DNA fragments from unstable chromosomes spill in the cytosol leading to the chronic activation of innate immune pathways, which are hijacked by cancer cells to spread to distant organs.\n\nExpression of this metastatic signature has been correlated with a poor prognosis and has been shown to be consistent in several types of cancer. Prognosis was shown to be worse for individuals whose primary tumors expressed the metastatic signature. Additionally, the expression of these metastatic-associated genes was shown to apply to other cancer types in addition to adenocarcinoma. Metastases of breast cancer, medulloblastoma and prostate cancer all had similar expression patterns of these metastasis-associated genes.\n\nThe identification of this metastasis-associated signature provides promise for identifying cells with metastatic potential within the primary tumor and hope for improving the prognosis of these metastatic-associated cancers. Additionally, identifying the genes whose expression is changed in metastasis offers potential targets to inhibit metastasis.\n\nTreatment and survival is determined, to a great extent, by whether or not a cancer remains localized or spreads to other locations in the body. If the cancer metastasizes to other tissues or organs it usually dramatically increases a patient's likelihood of death. Some cancers—such as some forms of leukemia, a cancer of the blood, or malignancies in the brain—can kill without spreading at all.\n\nOnce a cancer has metastasized it may still be treated with radiosurgery, chemotherapy, radiation therapy, biological therapy, hormone therapy, surgery, or a combination of these interventions (\"multimodal therapy\"). The choice of treatment depends on a large number of factors, including the type of primary cancer, the size and location of the metastases, the patient's age and general health, and the types of treatments used previously. In patients diagnosed with CUP it is often still possible to treat the disease even when the primary tumor cannot be located.\n\nCurrent treatments are rarely able to cure metastatic cancer though some tumors, such as testicular cancer and thyroid cancer, are usually curable.\n\nPalliative care, care aimed at improving the quality of life of people with major illness, has been recommended as part of management programs for metastasis.\n\nAlthough metastasis is widely accepted to be the result of the tumor cells migration, there is a hypothesis saying that some metastases are the result of inflammatory processes by abnormal immune cells. The existence of metastatic cancers in the absence of primary tumors also suggests that metastasis is not always caused by malignant cells that leave primary tumors.\n\nIn March 2014 researchers discovered the oldest complete example of a human with metastatic cancer. The tumors had developed in a 3,000-year-old skeleton found in 2013 in a tomb in Sudan dating back to 1200 BC. The skeleton was analyzed using radiography and a scanning electron microscope. These findings were published in the \"Public Library of Science\" journal.\n\nMetastasis is a Greek word meaning \"displacement\", from μετά, \"meta\", \"next\", and στάσις, \"stasis\", \"placement\".\n\n\nMedical information about metastatic cancer\n"}
{"id": "152623", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=152623", "title": "Radiology", "text": "Radiology\n\nRadiology is the medical specialty that uses medical imaging to diagnose and treat diseases within the human body.\n\nA variety of imaging techniques such as X-ray radiography, ultrasound, computed tomography (CT), nuclear medicine including positron emission tomography (PET), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are used to diagnose or treat diseases. Interventional radiology is the performance of usually minimally invasive medical procedures with the guidance of imaging technologies such as X-ray radiography, ultrasound, computed tomography (CT), nuclear medicine including positron emission tomography (PET), and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).\n\nThe modern practice of radiology involves several different healthcare professions working as a team. The radiologist is a medical doctor who has completed the appropriate post-graduate training and interprets medical images, communicates these findings to other physicians by means of a report or verbally, and uses imaging to perform minimally invasive medical procedures. The nurse is involved in the care of patients before and after imaging or procedures, including administration of medications, monitoring of vital signs and monitoring of sedated patients. The radiographer, also known as a \"radiologic technologist\" in some countries such as the United States, is a specially trained healthcare professional that uses sophisticated technology and positioning techniques to produce medical images for the radiologist and nurse to interpret. Depending on the individual's training and country of practice, the radiographer may specialize in one of the above-mentioned imaging modalities or have expanded roles in image reporting.\n\nRadiographs (originally called roentgenographs, named after the discoverer of X-rays, Wilhelm Conrad Röntgen) are produced by transmitting X-rays through a patient. The X-rays are projected through the body onto a detector; an image is formed based on which rays pass through (and are detected) versus those that are absorbed or scattered in the patient (and thus are not detected). Röntgen discovered X-rays on November 8, 1895 and received the first Nobel Prize in Physics for their discovery in 1901.\n\nIn film-screen radiography, an X-ray tube generates a beam of X-rays, which is aimed at the patient. The X-rays that pass through the patient are filtered through a device called an grid or X-ray filter, to reduce scatter, and strike an undeveloped film, which is held tightly to a screen of light-emitting phosphors in a light-tight cassette. The film is then developed chemically and an image appears on the film. Film-screen radiography is being replaced by phosphor plate radiography but more recently by digital radiography (DR) and the EOS imaging. In the two latest systems, the X-rays strike sensors that converts the signals generated into digital information, which is transmitted and converted into an image displayed on a computer screen. In digital radiography the sensors shape a plate, but in the EOS system, which is a slot-scanning system, a linear sensor vertically scans the patient.\n\nPlain radiography was the only imaging modality available during the first 50 years of radiology. Due to its availability, speed, and lower costs compared to other modalities, radiography is often the first-line test of choice in radiologic diagnosis. Also despite the large amount of data in CT scans, MR scans and other digital-based imaging, there are many disease entities in which the classic diagnosis is obtained by plain radiographs. Examples include various types of arthritis and pneumonia, bone tumors (especially benign bone tumors), fractures, congenital skeletal anomalies, etc.\n\nMammography and DXA are two applications of low energy projectional radiography, used for the evaluation for breast cancer and osteoporosis, respectively.\n\nFluoroscopy and angiography are special applications of X-ray imaging, in which a fluorescent screen and image intensifier tube is connected to a closed-circuit television system. This allows real-time imaging of structures in motion or augmented with a radiocontrast agent. Radiocontrast agents are usually administered by swallowing or injecting into the body of the patient to delineate anatomy and functioning of the blood vessels, the genitourinary system, or the gastrointestinal tract (GI tract). Two radiocontrast agents are presently in common use. Barium sulfate (BaSO) is given orally or rectally for evaluation of the GI tract. Iodine, in multiple proprietary forms, is given by oral, rectal, vaginal, intra-arterial or intravenous routes. These radiocontrast agents strongly absorb or scatter X-rays, and in conjunction with the real-time imaging, allow demonstration of dynamic processes, such as peristalsis in the digestive tract or blood flow in arteries and veins. Iodine contrast may also be concentrated in abnormal areas more or less than in normal tissues and make abnormalities (tumors, cysts, inflammation) more conspicuous. Additionally, in specific circumstances, air can be used as a contrast agent for the gastrointestinal system and carbon dioxide can be used as a contrast agent in the venous system; in these cases, the contrast agent attenuates the X-ray radiation less than the surrounding tissues.\n\nCT imaging uses X-rays in conjunction with computing algorithms to image the body.\nIn CT, an X-ray tube opposite an X-ray detector (or detectors) in a ring-shaped apparatus rotate around a patient, producing a computer-generated cross-sectional image (tomogram). CT is acquired in the axial plane, with coronal and sagittal images produced by computer reconstruction. Radiocontrast agents are often used with CT for enhanced delineation of anatomy. Although radiographs provide higher spatial resolution, CT can detect more subtle variations in attenuation of X-rays (higher contrast resolution). CT exposes the patient to significantly more ionizing radiation than a radiograph.\n\nSpiral multidetector CT uses 16, 64, 254 or more detectors during continuous motion of the patient through the radiation beam to obtain fine detail images in a short exam time. With rapid administration of intravenous contrast during the CT scan, these fine detail images can be reconstructed into three-dimensional (3D) images of carotid, cerebral, coronary or other arteries.\n\nThe introduction of computed tomography in the early 1970s revolutionized diagnostic radiology by providing Clinicians with images of real three-dimensional anatomic structures. CT scanning has become the test of choice in diagnosing some urgent and emergent conditions, such as cerebral hemorrhage, pulmonary embolism (clots in the arteries of the lungs), aortic dissection (tearing of the aortic wall), appendicitis, diverticulitis, and obstructing kidney stones. Continuing improvements in CT technology, including faster scanning times and improved resolution, have dramatically increased the accuracy and usefulness of CT scanning, which may partially account for increased use in medical diagnosis.\n\nMedical ultrasonography uses ultrasound (high-frequency sound waves) to visualize soft tissue structures in the body in real time. No ionizing radiation is involved, but the quality of the images obtained using ultrasound is highly dependent on the skill of the person (ultrasonographer) performing the exam and the patient's body size. Examinations of larger, overweight patients may have a decrease in image quality as their subcutaneous fat absorbs more of the sound waves. This results in fewer sound waves penetrating to organs and reflecting back to the transducer, resulting in loss of information and a poorer quality image. Ultrasound is also limited by its inability to image through air pockets (lungs, bowel loops) or bone. Its use in medical imaging has developed mostly within the last 30 years. The first ultrasound images were static and two-dimensional (2D), but with modern ultrasonography, 3D reconstructions can be observed in real time, effectively becoming \"4D\".\n\nBecause ultrasound imaging techniques do not employ ionizing radiation to generate images (unlike radiography, and CT scans), they are generally considered safer and are therefore more common in obstetrical imaging. The progression of pregnancies can be thoroughly evaluated with less concern about damage from the techniques employed, allowing early detection and diagnosis of many fetal anomalies. Growth can be assessed over time, important in patients with chronic disease or pregnancy-induced disease, and in multiple pregnancies (twins, triplets, etc.). Color-flow Doppler ultrasound measures the severity of peripheral vascular disease and is used by cardiologists for dynamic evaluation of the heart, heart valves and major vessels. Stenosis, for example, of the carotid arteries may be a warning sign for an impending stroke. A clot, embedded deep in one of the inner veins of the legs, can be found via ultrasound before it dislodges and travels to the lungs, resulting in a potentially fatal pulmonary embolism. Ultrasounds is useful as a guide to performing biopsies to minimise damage to surrounding tissues and in drainages such as thoracentesis. Small, portable ultrasound devices now replace peritoneal lavage in trauma wards by non-invasively assessing for the presence of internal bleeding and any internal organ damage. Extensive internal bleeding or injury to the major organs may require surgery and repair.\n\nMRI uses strong magnetic fields to align atomic nuclei (usually hydrogen protons) within body tissues, then uses a radio signal to disturb the axis of rotation of these nuclei and observes the radio frequency signal generated as the nuclei return to their baseline states. The radio signals are collected by small antennae, called coils, placed near the area of interest. An advantage of MRI is its ability to produce images in axial, coronal, sagittal and multiple oblique planes with equal ease. MRI scans give the best soft tissue contrast of all the imaging modalities. With advances in scanning speed and spatial resolution, and improvements in computer 3D algorithms and hardware, MRI has become an important tool in musculoskeletal radiology and neuroradiology.\n\nOne disadvantage is the patient has to hold still for long periods of time in a noisy, cramped space while the imaging is performed. Claustrophobia (fear of closed spaces) severe enough to terminate the MRI exam is reported in up to 5% of patients. Recent improvements in magnet design including stronger magnetic fields (3 teslas), shortening exam times, wider, shorter magnet bores and more open magnet designs, have brought some relief for claustrophobic patients. However, for magnets with equivalent field strengths, there is often a trade-off between image quality and open design. MRI has great benefit in imaging the brain, spine, and musculoskeletal system. The use of MRI is currently contraindicated for patients with pacemakers, cochlear implants, some indwelling medication pumps, certain types of cerebral aneurysm clips, metal fragments in the eyes and some metallic hardware due to the powerful magnetic fields and strong fluctuating radio signals to which the body is exposed. Areas of potential advancement include functional imaging, cardiovascular MRI, and MRI-guided therapy.\n\nNuclear medicine imaging involves the administration into the patient of radiopharmaceuticals consisting of substances with affinity for certain body tissues labeled with radioactive tracer. The most commonly used tracers are technetium-99m, iodine-123, iodine-131, gallium-67, indium-111, thallium-201 and fludeoxyglucose (18F) (18F-FDG). The heart, lungs, thyroid, liver, brain, gallbladder, and bones are commonly evaluated for particular conditions using these techniques. While anatomical detail is limited in these studies, nuclear medicine is useful in displaying physiological function. The excretory function of the kidneys, iodine-concentrating ability of the thyroid, blood flow to heart muscle, etc. can be measured. The principal imaging devices are the gamma camera and the PET Scanner, which detect the radiation emitted by the tracer in the body and display it as an image. With computer processing, the information can be displayed as axial, coronal and sagittal images (single-photon emission computed tomography - SPECT or Positron-emission tomography - PET). In the most modern devices, nuclear medicine images can be fused with a CT scan taken quasisimultaneously, so the physiological information can be overlaid or coregistered with the anatomical structures to improve diagnostic accuracy.\n\nPositron emission tomography (PET) scanning deals with positrons instead of gamma rays detected by gamma cameras. The positrons annihilate to produce two opposite traveling gamma rays to be detected coincidentally, thus improving resolution. In PET scanning, a radioactive, biologically active substance, most often 18F-FDG, is injected into a patient and the radiation emitted by the patient is detected to produce multiplanar images of the body. Metabolically more active tissues, such as cancer, concentrate the active substance more than normal tissues. PET images can be combined (or \"fused\") with anatomic (CT) imaging, to more accurately localize PET findings and thereby improve diagnostic accuracy.\n\nThe fusion technology has gone further to combine PET and MRI similar to PET and CT. PET/MRI fusion, largely practiced in academic and research settings, could potentially play a crucial role in fine detail of brain imaging, breast cancer screening, and small joint imaging of the foot. The technology recently blossomed after passing the technical hurdle of altered positron movement in strong magnetic field thus affecting the resolution of PET images and attenuation correction.\n\nInterventional radiology (IR or sometimes VIR for vascular and interventional radiology) is a subspecialty of radiology in which minimally invasive procedures are performed using image guidance. Some of these procedures are done for purely diagnostic purposes (e.g., angiogram), while others are done for treatment purposes (e.g., angioplasty)\n\nThe basic concept behind interventional radiology is to diagnose or treat pathologies, with the most minimally invasive technique possible. Minimally invasive procedures are currently performed more than ever before. These procedures are often performed with the patient fully awake, with little or no sedation required. Interventional Radiologists and Interventional Radiographers diagnose and treat several disorders, including peripheral vascular disease, renal artery stenosis, inferior vena cava filter placement, gastrostomy tube placements, biliary stents and hepatic interventions. Images are used for guidance, and the primary instruments used during the procedure are needles and catheters. The images provide maps that allow the Clinician to guide these instruments through the body to the areas containing disease. By minimizing the physical trauma to the patient, peripheral interventions can reduce infection rates and recovery times, as well as hospital stays. To be a trained interventionalist in the United States, an individual completes a five-year residency in radiology and a one- or two-year fellowship in IR.\n\nTeleradiology is the transmission of radiographic images from one location to another for interpretation by an appropriately trained professional, usually a Radiologist or Reporting Radiographer. It is most often used to allow rapid interpretation of emergency room, ICU and other emergent examinations after hours of usual operation, at night and on weekends. In these cases, the images can be sent across time zones (e.g. to Spain, Australia, India) with the receiving Clinician working his normal daylight hours. However at present, large private teleradiology companies in the U.S. currently provide most after-hours coverage employing night working Radiologists in the U.S. Teleradiology can also be used to obtain consultation with an expert or subspecialist about a complicated or puzzling case. In the U.S., many hospitals outsource their radiology departments to radiologists in India due to the lowered cost and availability of high speed internet access.\n\nTeleradiology requires a sending station, a high-speed internet connection, and a high-quality receiving station. At the transmission station, plain radiographs are passed through a digitizing machine before transmission, while CT, MRI, ultrasound and nuclear medicine scans can be sent directly, as they are already digital data. The computer at the receiving end will need to have a high-quality display screen that has been tested and cleared for clinical purposes. Reports are then transmitted to the requesting clinician.\n\nThe major advantage of teleradiology is the ability to use different time zones to provide real-time emergency radiology services around-the-clock. The disadvantages include higher costs, limited contact between the referrer and the reporting Clinician, and the inability to cover for procedures requiring an onsite reporting Clinician. Laws and regulations concerning the use of teleradiology vary among the states, with some requiring a license to practice medicine in the state sending the radiologic exam. In the U.S., some states require the teleradiology report to be preliminary with the official report issued by a hospital staff Radiologist.\n\nRadiology is an expanding field in medicine that has expanded rapidly after 2000 due to advances in computer technology, which is closely linked to modern imaging techniques. Applying for residency positions in radiology is very competitive due to extremely high compensation. Applicants are often near the top of their medical school classes, with high USMLE (board) examination scores. The field is rapidly expanding due to advances in computer technology, which is closely linked to modern imaging. Diagnostic radiologists must complete prerequisite undergraduate education, four years of medical school to earn a medical degree (D.O. or M.D.), one year of internship, and four years of residency training. After residency, radiologists may pursue one or two years of additional specialty fellowship training.\n\nThe American Board of Radiology (ABR) administers professional certification in Diagnostic Radiology, Radiation Oncology and Medical Physics as well as subspecialty certification in neuroradiology, nuclear radiology, pediatric radiology and vascular and interventional radiology. \"Board Certification\" in diagnostic radiology requires successful completion of two examinations. The Core Exam is given after 36 months of residency. This computer-based examination is given twice a year in Chicago and Tucson. It encompasses 18 categories. A pass of all 18 is a pass. A fail on 1 to 5 categories is a Conditioned exam and the resident will need to retake and pass the failed categories. A fail on over 5 categories is a failed exam. The Certification Exam, can be taken 15 months after completion of the Radiology residency. This computer-based examination consists of 5 modules and graded pass-fail. It is given twice a year in Chicago and Tucson. Recertification examinations are taken every 10 years, with additional required continuing medical education as outlined in the Maintenance of Certification document.\n\nCertification may also be obtained from the American Osteopathic Board of Radiology (AOBR) and the American Board of Physician Specialties.\n\nFollowing completion of residency training, Radiologists may either begin practicing as a general Diagnostic Radiologist or enter into subspecialty training programs known as fellowships. Examples of subspeciality training in radiology include abdominal imaging, thoracic imaging, cross-sectional/ultrasound, MRI, musculoskeletal imaging, interventional radiology, neuroradiology, interventional neuroradiology, paediatric radiology, nuclear medicine, emergency radiology, breast imaging and women's imaging. Fellowship training programs in radiology are usually one or two years in length.\n\nSome medical schools in the US have started to incorporate a basic radiology introduction into their core MD training. New York Medical College, the Wayne State University School of Medicine, Weill Cornell Medicine, the Uniformed Services University, and the University of South Carolina School of Medicine offer an introduction to radiology during their respective MD programs. Campbell University School of Osteopathic Medicine also integrates imaging material into their curriculum early in the first year.\n\nRadiographic exams are usually performed by Radiographers. Qualifications for Radiographers vary by country, but many Radiographers now are required to hold a degree.\n\nVeterinary Radiologists are veterinarians who specialize in the use of X-rays, ultrasound, MRI and nuclear medicine for diagnostic imaging or treatment of disease in animals. They are certified in either diagnostic radiology or radiation oncology by the American College of Veterinary Radiology.\n\nRadiology is an extremely competitive speciality in the UK, attracting applicants from a broad range of backgrounds. Applicants are welcomed directly from the foundation programme, as well as those who have completed higher training. Recruitment and selection into training post in clinical radiology posts in England, Scotland and Wales is done by an annual nationally coordinated process lasting from November to March. In this process, all applicants are required to pass a Specialty Recruitment Assessment (SRA) test. Those with a test score above a certain threshold are offered a single interview at the London and the South East Recruitment Office. At a later stage, applicants declare what programs they prefer, but may in some cases be placed in a neighbouring region.\n\nThe training programme lasts for a total of five years. During this time, doctors rotate into different subspecialities, such as paediatrics, musculoskeletal or neuroradiology, and breast imaging. During the first year of training, radiology trainees are expected to pass the first part of the Fellowship of the Royal College of Radiologists (FRCR) exam. This comprises a medical physics and anatomy examination. Following completion of their part 1 exam, they are then required to pass six written exams (part 2A), which cover all the subspecialities. Successful completion of these allows them to complete the FRCR by completing part 2B, which includes rapid reporting, and a long case discussion.\n\nAfter achieving a certificate of completion of training (CCT), many fellowship posts exist in specialities such as neurointervention and vascular intervention, which would allow the Doctor to work as an Interventional Radiologist. In some cases, the CCT date can be deferred by a year to include these fellowship programmes.\n\nUK radiology registrars are represented by the Society of Radiologists in Training (SRT), which was founded in 1993 under the auspices of the Royal College of Radiologists. The society is a nonprofit organisation, run by radiology registrars specifically to promote radiology training and education in the UK. Annual meetings are held by which trainees across the country are encouraged to attend.\n\nCurrently, a shortage of radiologists in the UK has created opportunities in all specialities, and with the increased reliance on imaging, demand is expected to increase in the future. Radiographers, and less frequently Nurses, are often trained to undertake many of these opportunities in order to help meet demand. Radiographers often may control a \"list\" of a particular set of procedures after being approved locally and signed off by a Consultant Radiologist. Similarly, Radiographers may simply operate a list for a Radiologist or other Physician on their behalf. Most often if a Radiographer operates a list autonomously then they are acting as the Operator and Practitioner under the Ionising Radiation (Medical Exposures) Regulations 2000. Radiographers are represented by a variety of bodies, most often this is the Society and College of Radiographers. Collaboration with Nurses is also common, where a list may be jointly organised between the Nurse and Radiographer.\n\nAfter obtaining medical licensure, German Radiologists complete a five-year residency, culminating with a board examination (known as \"Facharztprüfung\").\n\nThe radiology training program in Italy increased from four to five years in 2008. Further training is required for specialization in radiotherapy or nuclear medicine.\n\nDutch radiologists complete a five-year residency program after completing the 6-year MD program.\n\nThe radiology training course is a post graduate 3-year program (MD/DNB Radiology) or a 2-year diploma (DMRD).\n\nRadiologists in Singapore complete a five-year undergraduate medicine degree followed by a one-year Internship (medical) and then a five-year residency program. Some Radiologists may elect to complete a one or two-year fellowship for further sub-specialization in fields such as interventional radiology.\n\n"}
{"id": "152642", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=152642", "title": "Rush goalie", "text": "Rush goalie\n\nRush goalie, also known as a fly goalie or fly keeper, is a variation of association football in which the role of the goalkeeper is more flexible than normal. The goalkeeper position is taken by any player who can run out of and leave his goal to actively participate in outfield play. However, when defending the player returns to his goal and takes up the role of goalkeeper once again, in rush goalie only one player can be the goalkeeper and handle the ball. Once the danger has passed, that player (the \"rush goalie\") returns to normal outfield play. Rush goalie is only played in informal football matches, usually by children, and often when the players want to play a more active role in the game than the position of goalkeeper would normally allow; it can also be applied when the number of players per side is low.\n\nA rush goalie system can also be used as a way of leveling out teams when playing with an uneven number of players - usually, the team with an extra man will be forced to nominate one player to stay in goal permanently (also known as \"stick keeper\" or simply \"sticks\") while the other team is allowed to play \"rush\".\n\nA different variation to Rush goalie is known as Last Man Back, or 'spider goalie', or monkey rush. In Last Man Back no player is chosen as the goalkeeper for a team, and all players participate in outfield play, usually leaving the position of goalkeeper open. However, when the other team is on the attack, the closest player to the net or the Last Man Back is allowed to handle the ball, taking on the role of goalkeeper. This can create controversy as to who was actually the closest player to the net, so sometimes Nets is played.\n\nIn nets players are only allowed to handle the ball in the area provided they have shouted \"nets\" or \"when\" (or other regional variants) before touching the ball.\n\n"}
{"id": "155337", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=155337", "title": "Hyponymy and hypernymy", "text": "Hyponymy and hypernymy\n\nIn linguistics, a hyponym (from Greek \"hupó\", \"under\" and \"ónoma\", \"name\") is a word or phrase whose semantic field is included within that of another word, its hyperonym or hypernym (from Greek \"hupér\", \"over\" and \"ónoma\", \"name\"). In simpler terms, a hyponym is in a \"type-of\" relationship with its hypernym. For example, \"pigeon\", \"crow\", \"eagle\" and \"seagull\" are all hyponyms of \"bird\" (their hypernym); which, in turn, is a hyponym of \"animal\".\n\nOther names for hypernym include umbrella term and blanket term. \n\nHyponymy shows the relationship between a generic term (hypernym) and a specific instance of it (hyponym). A hyponym is a word or phrase whose semantic field is more specific than its hypernym. The semantic field of a hypernym, also known as a superordinate, is broader than that of a hyponym. An approach to the relationship between hyponyms and hypernyms is to view a hypernym as consisting of hyponyms. This, however, becomes more difficult with abstract words such as \"imagine\", \"understand\" and \"knowledge\". While hyponyms are typically used to refer to nouns, it can also be used on other parts of speech. Like nouns, hypernyms in verbs are words that refer to a broad category of actions. For example, verbs such as \"stare\", \"gaze\", \"view\" and \"peer\" can also be considered hyponyms of the verb \"look\", which is their hypernym.\n\nHypernyms and hyponyms are asymmetric. Hyponymy can be tested by substituting X and Y in the sentence ‘X is a kind of Y’ and determining if it makes sense. For example, ‘A screwdriver is a kind of tool’ makes sense but not ‘A tool is a kind of screwdriver’.\n\nStrictly speaking, the meaning relation between hyponyms and hypernyms applies to lexical items of the same word class (or parts of speech), and holds between senses rather than words. For instance, the word \"screwdriver\" used in the previous example refers to the tool for turning a screw, and not to the drink made with vodka and orange juice.\n\nHyponymy is a transitive relation, if X is a hyponym of Y, and Y is a hyponym of Z, then X is a hyponym of Z. For example, \"violet\" is a hyponym of \"purple\" and \"purple\" is a hyponym of \"color\"; therefore \"violet\" is a hyponym of \"color\". A word can be both a hypernym and a hyponym: for example \"purple\" is a hyponym of colour but itself is a hypernym of the broad spectrum of shades of purple between the range of \"crimson\" and \"violet\".\n\nThe hierarchical structure of semantic fields can be mostly seen in hyponymy. They could be observed from top to bottom, where the higher level is more general and the lower level is more specific. For example, \"living things\" will be the highest level followed by \"plants\" and \"animals\", and the lowest level may comprise \"dog\", \"cat\" and \"wolf\".\n\nUnder the relations of hyponymy and incompatibility, taxonomic hierarchical structures too can be formed. It consists of two relations; the first one being exemplified in 'An X is a Y' (simple hyponymy) while the second relation is 'An X is a kind/type of Y'. The second relation is said to be more discriminating and can be classified more specifically under the concept of taxonomy.\n\nIf the hypernym Z consists of hyponyms X and Y, X and Y are identified as co-hyponyms. Co-hyponyms are labelled as such when separate hyponyms share the same hypernym but are not hyponyms of one another, unless they happen to be synonymous. For example, \"screwdriver\", \"scissors\", \"knife\", and \"hammer\" are all co-hyponyms of one another and hyponyms of \"tool\", but not hyponyms of one another: *‘A hammer is a type of knife’ is false.\n\nCo-hyponyms are often but not always related to one another by the relation of incompatibility. For example, \"apple\", \"peach\" and \"plum\" are co-hyponyms of \"fruit\". However, an \"apple\" is not a \"peach\", which is also not a \"plum\". Thus, they are incompatible. Nevertheless, co-hyponyms are not necessarily incompatible in all senses. A \"queen\" and \"mother\" are both hyponyms of \"woman\" but there is nothing preventing the \"queen\" from being a \"mother\". This shows that compatibility may be relevant.\n\nA word is an autohyponym if it is used for both a hypernym and its hyponym. For example, the word \"dog\" describes both Canis familiaris and male Canis familaris, so it is possible to say \"That dog isn't a dog, it's a bitch\" (\"That hypernym Z isn't a hyponym Z, it's a hyponym Y\"). Similarly, the verb to drink (a beverage) is a hypernym for to drink (an alcoholic beverage). Autohyponymy is also called \"vertical polysemy\". \n\nThe term \"autohyponym\" was coined by linguist Laurence R. Horn in a 1984 paper, \"Ambiguity, negation, and the London School of Parsimony.\" Linguist Ruth Kempson had already observed that if there are hyponyms for one part of a set but not another, the hypernym can complement the existing hyponym by being used for the remaining part. For example, fingers describe all digits on a hand, but the existence of the word thumb for the first finger means that fingers can also be used for \"non-thumb digits on a hand\".\n\nHorn called this \"licensed polysemy\", but found that autohyponyms also formed even when there is no other hyponym. Yankee is autohyponymous because it is a hyponym (native of New England) and its hypernym (native of the United States), even though there is no other hyponym of Yankee (as native of the United States) that means \"not a native of New England\".\n\nIn some cases, autohyponyms duplicate existing, distinct hyponyms. The hypernym \"smell\" (to emit any smell) has a hyponym \"stink\" (to emit a bad smell), but is autohyponymous because \"smell\" can also mean \"to emit a bad smell\", even though there is no \"to emit a smell that isn't bad\" hyponym.\n\nComputer science often terms this relationship an \"is-a\" relationship. For example, the phrase 'Red is-a colour' can be used to describe the hyponymic relationship between \"red\" and \"colour\".\nHyponymy is the most frequently encoded relation among synsets used in lexical databases such as WordNet. These semantic relations can also be used to compare semantic similarity by judging the distance between two synsets and to analyse Anaphora.\n\nAs a hypernym can be understood as a more general word than its hyponym, the relation is used in semantic compression by generalization to reduce a level of specialization.\n\nThe notion of hyponymy is particularly relevant to language translation, as hyponyms are very common across languages. For example, in Japanese the word for older brother is , and the word for younger brother is . An English-to-Japanese translator presented with a phrase containing the English word \"brother\" would have to choose which Japanese word equivalent to use. This would be difficult, because abstract information (such as the speakers' relative ages) is often not available during machine translation.\n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "155469", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=155469", "title": "Gregorian chant", "text": "Gregorian chant\n\nGregorian chant is the central tradition of Western plainchant, a form of monophonic, unaccompanied sacred song of the Roman Catholic Church. Gregorian chant developed mainly in western and central Europe during the 9th and 10th centuries, with later additions and redactions. Although popular legend credits Pope Gregory I with inventing Gregorian chant, scholars believe that it arose from a later Carolingian synthesis of Roman chant and Gallican chant.\n\nGregorian chants were organized initially into four, then eight, and finally 12 modes. Typical melodic features include a characteristic ambitus, and also characteristic intervallic patterns relative to a referential mode final, incipits and cadences, the use of reciting tones at a particular distance from the final, around which the other notes of the melody revolve, and a vocabulary of musical motifs woven together through a process called centonization to create families of related chants. The scale patterns are organized against a background pattern formed of conjunct and disjunct tetrachords, producing a larger pitch system called the gamut. The chants can be sung by using six-note patterns called hexachords. Gregorian melodies are traditionally written using neumes, an early form of musical notation from which the modern four-line and five-line staff developed. Multi-voice elaborations of Gregorian chant, known as organum, were an early stage in the development of Western polyphony.\n\nGregorian chant was traditionally sung by choirs of men and boys in churches, or by men and women of religious orders in their chapels. It is the music of the Roman Rite, performed in the Mass and the monastic Office. Although Gregorian chant supplanted or marginalized the other indigenous plainchant traditions of the Christian West to become the official music of the Christian liturgy, Ambrosian chant still continues in use in Milan, and there are musicologists exploring both that and the Mozarabic chant of Christian Spain. Although Gregorian chant is no longer obligatory, the Roman Catholic Church still officially considers it the music most suitable for worship. During the 20th century, Gregorian chant underwent a musicological and popular resurgence.\n\nSinging has been part of the Christian liturgy since the earliest days of the Church. Until the mid-1990s, it was widely accepted that the psalmody of ancient Jewish worship significantly influenced and contributed to early Christian ritual and chant. This view is no longer generally accepted by scholars, due to analysis that shows that most early Christian hymns did not have Psalms for texts, and that the Psalms were not sung in synagogues for centuries after the Destruction of the Second Temple in AD 70. However, early Christian rites did incorporate elements of Jewish worship that survived in later chant tradition. Canonical hours have their roots in Jewish prayer hours. \"Amen\" and \"alleluia\" come from Hebrew, and the threefold \"sanctus\" derives from the threefold \"kadosh\" of the Kedushah.\n\nThe New Testament mentions singing hymns during the Last Supper: \"When they had sung the hymn, they went out to the Mount of Olives\" . Other ancient witnesses such as Pope Clement I, Tertullian, St. Athanasius, and Egeria confirm the practice, although in poetic or obscure ways that shed little light on how music sounded during this period. The 3rd-century Greek \"Oxyrhynchus hymn\" survived with musical notation, but the connection between this hymn and the plainchant tradition is uncertain.\n\nMusical elements that would later be used in the Roman Rite began to appear in the 3rd century. The \"Apostolic Tradition\", attributed to the theologian Hippolytus, attests the singing of Hallel psalms with Alleluia as the refrain in early Christian \"agape\" feasts. Chants of the Office, sung during the canonical hours, have their roots in the early 4th century, when desert monks following St. Anthony introduced the practice of continuous psalmody, singing the complete cycle of 150 psalms each week. Around 375, antiphonal psalmody became popular in the Christian East; in 386, St. Ambrose introduced this practice to the West. In the fifth century, a singing school, the Schola Cantorum, was founded at Rome to provide training in church musicianship.\n\nScholars are still debating how plainchant developed during the 5th through the 9th centuries, as information from this period is scarce. Around 410, St. Augustine described the responsorial singing of a Gradual psalm at Mass. At c. 520, Benedict of Nursia established what is called the rule of St. Benedict, in which the protocol of the Divine Office for monastic use was laid down. Around 678, Roman chant was taught at York. Distinctive regional traditions of Western plainchant arose during this period, notably in the British Isles (Celtic chant), Spain (Mozarabic), Gaul (Gallican), and Italy (Old Roman, Ambrosian and Beneventan). These traditions may have evolved from a hypothetical year-round repertory of 5th-century plainchant after the western Roman Empire collapsed.\n\nJohn the Deacon, biographer (c. 872) of Pope Gregory I, modestly claimed that the saint \"compiled a patchwork antiphonary\", unsurprisingly, given his considerable work with liturgical development. He reorganized the Schola Cantorum and established a more uniform standard in church services, gathering chants from among the regional traditions as widely as he could manage. Of those, he retained what he could, revised where necessary, and assigned particular chants to the various services. According to Donald Jay Grout, his goal was to organize the bodies of chants from diverse traditions into a uniform and orderly whole for use by the entire western region of the Church. His renowned love for music was recorded only 34 years after his death; the epitaph of Honorius testified that comparison to Gregory was already considered the highest praise for a music-loving pope. While later legends magnified his real achievements, these significant steps may account for why his name came to be attached to Gregorian chant.\n\nThe Gregorian repertory was further systematized for use in the Roman Rite, and scholars weigh the relative influences of Roman and Carolingian practices upon the development of plainchant. The late 8th century saw a steadily increasing influence of the Carolingian monarchs over the popes. During a visit to Gaul in 752–753, Pope Stephen II celebrated Mass using Roman chant. According to Charlemagne, his father Pepin abolished the local Gallican Rites in favor of the Roman use, in order to strengthen ties with Rome. Thirty years later (785–786), at Charlemagne's request, Pope Adrian I sent a papal sacramentary with Roman chants to the Carolingian court. According to James McKinnon, over a brief period in the 8th century, a project overseen by Chrodegang of Metz in the favorable atmosphere of the Carolingian monarchs, also compiled the core liturgy of the Roman Mass and promoted its use in Francia and throughout Gaul.\n\nWilli Apel and Robert Snow assert a scholarly consensus that Gregorian chant developed around 750 from a synthesis of Roman and Gallican chants, and was commissioned by the Carolingian rulers in France. Andreas Pfisterer and Peter Jeffery have shown that older melodic essentials from Roman chant are clear in the synthesized chant repertory. There were other developments as well. Chants were modified, influenced by local styles and Gallican chant, and fitted into the theory of the ancient Greek octoechos system of modes in a manner that created what later came to be known as the western system of the eight church modes. The Metz project also invented an innovative musical notation, using freeform neumes to show the shape of a remembered melody. This notation was further developed over time, culminating in the introduction of staff lines (attributed to Guido d'Arezzo) in the early 11th century, what we know today as plainchant notation. The whole body of Frankish-Roman Carolingian chant, augmented with new chants to complete the liturgical year, coalesced into a single body of chant that was called \"Gregorian.\"\n\nThe changes made in the new system of chants were so significant that they have led some scholars to speculate that it was named in honor of the contemporary Pope Gregory II. Nevertheless, the lore surrounding Pope Gregory I was sufficient to culminate in his portrayal as the actual author of Gregorian Chant. He was often depicted as receiving the dictation of plainchant from a dove representing the Holy Spirit, thus giving Gregorian chant the stamp of being divinely inspired. Scholars agree that the melodic content of much Gregorian Chant did not exist in that form in Gregory I's day. In addition, it is known definitively that the familiar neumatic system for notating plainchant had not been established in his time. Nevertheless, Gregory's authorship is popularly accepted by some as fact to this day.\n\nGregorian chant appeared in a remarkably uniform state across Europe within a short time. Charlemagne, once elevated to Holy Roman Emperor, aggressively spread Gregorian chant throughout his empire to consolidate religious and secular power, requiring the clergy to use the new repertory on pain of death. From English and German sources, Gregorian chant spread north to Scandinavia, Iceland and Finland. In 885, Pope Stephen V banned the Slavonic liturgy, leading to the ascendancy of Gregorian chant in Eastern Catholic lands including Poland, Moravia and Slovakia.\n\nThe other plainchant repertories of the Christian West faced severe competition from the new Gregorian chant. Charlemagne continued his father's policy of favoring the Roman Rite over the local Gallican traditions. By the 9th century the Gallican rite and chant had effectively been eliminated, although not without local resistance. The Gregorian chant of the Sarum Rite displaced Celtic chant. Gregorian coexisted with Beneventan chant for over a century before Beneventan chant was abolished by papal decree (1058). Mozarabic chant survived the influx of the Visigoths and Moors, but not the Roman-backed prelates newly installed in Spain during the Reconquista. Restricted to a handful of dedicated chapels, modern Mozarabic chant is highly Gregorianized and bears no musical resemblance to its original form. Ambrosian chant alone survived to the present day, preserved in Milan due to the musical reputation and ecclesiastical authority of St. Ambrose.\n\nGregorian chant eventually replaced the local chant tradition of Rome itself, which is now known as Old Roman chant. In the 10th century, virtually no musical manuscripts were being notated in Italy. Instead, Roman Popes imported Gregorian chant from (German) Holy Roman Emperors during the 10th and 11th centuries. For example, the Credo was added to the Roman Rite at the behest of the Emperor Henry II in 1014. Reinforced by the legend of Pope Gregory, Gregorian chant was taken to be the authentic, original chant of Rome, a misconception that continues to this day. By the 12th and 13th centuries, Gregorian chant had supplanted or marginalized all the other Western plainchant traditions.\n\nLater sources of these other chant traditions show an increasing Gregorian influence, such as occasional efforts to categorize their chants into the Gregorian modes. Similarly, the Gregorian repertory incorporated elements of these lost plainchant traditions, which can be identified by careful stylistic and historical analysis. For example, the \"Improperia\" of Good Friday are believed to be a remnant of the Gallican repertory.\n\nThe first extant sources with musical notation were written around 930 (Graduale Laon). Before this, plainchant had been transmitted orally. Most scholars of Gregorian chant agree that the development of music notation assisted the dissemination of chant across Europe. The earlier notated manuscripts are primarily from Regensburg in Germany, St. Gall in Switzerland, Laon and St. Martial in France.\n\nGregorian chant has in its long history been subjected to a series of redactions to bring it up to changing contemporary tastes and practice. The more recent redaction undertaken in the Benedictine Abbey of St. Pierre, Solesmes, has turned into a huge undertaking to restore the allegedly corrupted chant to a hypothetical \"original\" state. Early Gregorian chant was revised to conform to the theoretical structure of the modes. In 1562–63, the Council of Trent banned most sequences. Guidette's \"Directorium chori\", published in 1582, and the \"Editio medicea\", published in 1614, drastically revised what was perceived as corrupt and flawed \"barbarism\" by making the chants conform to contemporary aesthetic standards. In 1811, the French musicologist Alexandre-Étienne Choron, as part of a conservative backlash following the liberal Catholic orders' inefficacy during the French Revolution, called for returning to the \"purer\" Gregorian chant of Rome over French corruptions.\n\nIn the late 19th century, early liturgical and musical manuscripts were unearthed and edited. Earlier, Dom Prosper Guéranger revived the monastic tradition in Solesmes. Re-establishing the Divine Office was among his priorities, but no proper chantbooks existed. Many monks were sent out to libraries throughout Europe to find relevant Chant manuscripts. In 1871, however, the old Medicea edition was reprinted (Pustet, Regensburg) which Pope Pius IX declared the only official version. In their firm belief that they were on the right way, Solesmes increased its efforts. In 1889, after decades of research, the monks of Solesmes released the first book in a planned series, the Paléographie Musicale. The incentive of its publication was to demonstrate the corruption of the 'Medicea' by presenting photographed notations originating from a great variety of manuscripts of one single chant, which Solesmes called forth as witnesses to assert their own reforms.\n\nThe monks of Solesmes brought in their heaviest artillery in this battle, as indeed the academically sound 'Paleo' was intended to be a war-tank, meant to abolish once and for all the corrupted Pustet edition. On the evidence of congruence throughout various manuscripts (which were duly published in facsimile editions with ample editorial introductions) Solesmes was able to work out a practical reconstruction. This reconstructed chant was academically praised, but rejected by Rome until 1903, when Pope Leo XIII died. His successor, Pope Pius X, promptly accepted the Solesmes chant – now compiled as the \"Liber Usualis\" – as authoritative. In 1904, the Vatican edition of the Solesmes chant was commissioned. Serious academic debates arose, primarily owing to stylistic liberties taken by the Solesmes editors to impose their controversial interpretation of rhythm. The Solesmes editions insert phrasing marks and note-lengthening \"episema\" and \"mora\" marks not found in the original sources.\n\nConversely, they omit significative letters found in the original sources, which give instructions for rhythm and articulation such as speeding up or slowing down. These editorial practices have placed the historical authenticity of the Solesmes interpretation in doubt. Ever since restoration of Chant was taken up in Solesmes, there have been lengthy discussions of exactly what course was to be taken. Some favored a strict academic rigour and wanted to postpone publications, while others concentrated on practical matters and wanted to supplant the corrupted tradition as soon as possible. Roughly a century later, there still exists a breach between a strict musicological approach and the practical needs of church choirs. Thus the performance tradition officially promulgated since the onset of the Solesmes restoration is substantially at odds with musicological evidence.\n\nIn his motu proprio \"Tra le sollecitudini\", Pius X mandated the use of Gregorian chant, encouraging the faithful to sing the Ordinary of the Mass, although he reserved the singing of the Propers for males. While this custom is maintained in traditionalist Catholic communities (most of which allow all-female scholas as well, though), the Catholic Church no longer persists with this ban. Vatican II officially allowed worshipers to substitute other music, particularly sacred polyphony, in place of Gregorian chant, although it did reaffirm that Gregorian chant was still the official music of the Roman Rite of the Catholic Church, and the music most suitable for worship in the Roman Liturgy.\n\nGregorian chant is, as 'chant' implies, vocal music. The text, the phrases, words and eventually the syllables, can be sung in various ways. The most straightforward is recitation on the same tone, which is called \"syllabic\" as each syllable is sung to a single tone. Likewise, simple chants are often syllabic throughout with only a few instances where two or more notes are sung on one syllable. \"Neumatic\" chants are more embellished and ligatures, a connected group of notes, written as a single compound neume, abound in the text. Melismatic chants are the most ornate chants in which elaborate melodies are sung on long sustained vowels as in the Alleluia, ranging from five or six notes per syllable to over sixty in the more prolix melismata.\nGregorian chants fall into two broad categories of melody: recitatives and free melodies. The simplest kind of melody is the liturgical recitative. Recitative melodies are dominated by a single pitch, called the \"reciting tone\". Other pitches appear in melodic formulae for incipits, partial cadences, and full cadences. These chants are primarily syllabic. For example, the Collect for Easter consists of 127 syllables sung to 131 pitches, with 108 of these pitches being the reciting note A and the other 23 pitches flexing down to G. Liturgical recitatives are commonly found in the accentus chants of the liturgy, such as the intonations of the Collect, Epistle, and Gospel during the Mass, and in the direct psalmody of the Office.\n\nPsalmodic chants, which intone psalms, include both recitatives and free melodies. Psalmodic chants include \"direct psalmody\", \"antiphonal chants\", and \"responsorial chants\". In direct psalmody, psalm verses are sung without refrains to simple, formulaic tones. Most psalmodic chants are antiphonal and responsorial, sung to free melodies of varying complexity.\n\nAntiphonal chants such as the Introit, and Communion originally referred to chants in which two choirs sang in alternation, one choir singing verses of a psalm, the other singing a refrain called an \"antiphon\". Over time, the verses were reduced in number, usually to just one psalm verse and the doxology, or even omitted entirely. Antiphonal chants reflect their ancient origins as elaborate recitatives through the reciting tones in their melodies. Ordinary chants, such as the Kyrie and Gloria, are not considered antiphonal chants, although they are often performed in antiphonal style.\n\nResponsorial chants such as the Gradual, Alleluia, Offertory, and the Office Responsories originally consisted of a refrain called a \"respond\" sung by a choir, alternating with psalm verses sung by a soloist. Responsorial chants are often composed of an amalgamation of various stock musical phrases, pieced together in a practice called \"centonization\". Tracts are melismatic settings of psalm verses and use frequent recurring cadences and they are strongly centonized.\n\nGregorian chant evolved to fulfill various functions in the Roman Catholic liturgy. Broadly speaking, liturgical recitatives are used for texts intoned by deacons or priests. Antiphonal chants accompany liturgical actions: the entrance of the officiant, the collection of offerings, and the distribution of sanctified bread and wine. Responsorial chants expand on readings and lessons.\n\nThe non-psalmodic chants, including the Ordinary of the Mass, sequences, and hymns, were originally intended for congregational singing. The structure of their texts largely defines their musical style. In sequences, the same melodic phrase is repeated in each couplet. The strophic texts of hymns use the same syllabic melody for each stanza.\n\nEarly plainchant, like much of Western music, is believed to have been distinguished by the use of the diatonic scale. Modal theory, which postdates the composition of the core chant repertory, arises from a synthesis of two very different traditions: the speculative tradition of numerical ratios and species inherited from ancient Greece and a second tradition rooted in the practical art of cantus. The earliest writings that deal with both theory and practice include the Enchiriadis group of treatises, which circulated in the late ninth century and possibly have their roots in an earlier, oral tradition. In contrast to the ancient Greek system of tetrachords (a collection of four continuous notes) that descend by two tones and a semitone, the Enchiriadis writings base their tone-system on a tetrachord that corresponds to the four finals of chant, D, E, F, and G. The disjunct tetrachords in the Enchiriadis system have been the subject of much speculation, because they do not correspond to the diatonic framework that became the standard Medieval scale (for example, there is a high F#, a note not recognized by later Medieval writers). A diatonic scale with a chromatically alterable b/b-flat was first described by Hucbald, who adopted the tetrachord of the finals (D, E, F, G) and constructed the rest of the system following the model of the Greek Greater and Lesser Perfect Systems. These were the first steps in forging a theoretical tradition that corresponded to chant.\n\nAround 1025, Guido d'Arezzo revolutionized Western music with the development of the \"gamut\", in which pitches in the singing range were organized into overlapping hexachords. Hexachords could be built on C (the natural hexachord, C-D-E^F-G-A), F (the soft hexachord, using a B-flat, F-G-A^Bb-C-D), or G (the hard hexachord, using a B-natural, G-A-B^C-D-E). The B-flat was an integral part of the system of hexachords rather than an accidental. The use of notes outside of this collection was described as musica ficta.\n\nGregorian chant was categorized into eight modes, influenced by the eightfold division of Byzantine chants called the \"oktoechos\". Each mode is distinguished by its \"final\", \"dominant\", and \"ambitus\". The \"final\" is the ending note, which is usually an important note in the overall structure of the melody. The \"dominant\" is a secondary pitch that usually serves as a reciting tone in the melody. \"Ambitus\" refers to the range of pitches used in the melody. Melodies whose final is in the middle of the ambitus, or which have only a limited ambitus, are categorized as \"plagal\", while melodies whose final is in the lower end of the ambitus and have a range of over five or six notes are categorized as \"authentic\". Although corresponding plagal and authentic modes have the same final, they have different dominants. The existent pseudo-Greek names of the modes, rarely used in medieval times, derive from a misunderstanding of the Ancient Greek modes; the prefix \"hypo-\" (under, Gr.) indicates a plagal mode, where the melody moves below the final. In contemporary Latin manuscripts the modes are simply called Protus authentus /plagalis, Deuterus, Tritus and Tetrardus: the 1st mode, authentic or plagal, the 2nd mode etc. In the Roman Chantbooks the modes are indicated by Roman numerals.\n\nAlthough the modes with melodies ending on A, B, and C are sometimes referred to as Aeolian, Locrian, and Ionian, these are not considered distinct modes and are treated as transpositions of whichever mode uses the same set of hexachords. The actual pitch of the Gregorian chant is not fixed, so the piece can be sung in whichever range is most comfortable.\n\nCertain classes of Gregorian chant have a separate musical formula for each mode, allowing one section of the chant to transition smoothly into the next section, such as the psalm verses that are sung between the repetition of antiphons, or the Gloria Patri. Thus we find models for the recitation of psalmverses, Alleluia and Gloria Patri for all eight modes.\n\nNot every Gregorian chant fits neatly into Guido's hexachords or into the system of eight modes. For example, there are chants — especially from German sources – whose neumes suggest a warbling of pitches between the notes E and F, outside the hexachord system, or in other words, employing a form of chromatism. Early Gregorian chant, like Ambrosian and Old Roman chant, whose melodies are most closely related to Gregorian, did not use the modal system. The great need for a system of organizing chants lies in the need to link antiphons with standard tones, as in for example, the psalmody at the Office. Using Psalm Tone i with an antiphon in Mode 1 makes for a smooth transition between the end of the antiphon and the intonation of the tone, and the ending of the tone can then be chosen to provide a smooth transition back to the antiphon. As the modal system gained acceptance, Gregorian chants were edited to conform to the modes, especially during 12th-century Cistercian reforms. Finals were altered, melodic ranges reduced, melismata trimmed, B-flats eliminated, and repeated words removed. Despite these attempts to impose modal consistency, some chants — notably Communions — defy simple modal assignment. For example, in four medieval manuscripts, the Communion \"Circuibo\" was transcribed using a different mode in each.\n\nSeveral features besides modality contribute to the musical idiom of Gregorian chant, giving it a distinctive musical flavor. Melodic motion is primarily stepwise. Skips of a third are common, and larger skips far more common than in other plainchant repertories such as Ambrosian chant or Beneventan chant. Gregorian melodies are more likely to traverse a seventh than a full octave, so that melodies rarely travel from D up to the D an octave higher, but often travel from D to the C a seventh higher, using such patterns as D-F-G-A-C. Gregorian melodies often explore chains of pitches, such as F-A-C, around which the other notes of the chant gravitate. Within each mode, certain incipits and cadences are preferred, which the modal theory alone does not explain. Chants often display complex internal structures that combine and repeat musical subphrases. This occurs notably in the Offertories; in chants with shorter, repeating texts such as the Kyrie and Agnus Dei; and in longer chants with clear textual divisions such as the Great Responsories, the Gloria, and the Credo.\n\nChants sometimes fall into melodically related groups. The musical phrases centonized to create Graduals and Tracts follow a musical \"grammar\" of sorts. Certain phrases are used only at the beginnings of chants, or only at the end, or only in certain combinations, creating musical families of chants such as the \"Iustus ut palma\" family of Graduals. Several Introits in mode 3, including \"Loquetur Dominus\" above, exhibit melodic similarities. Mode III (E authentic) chants have C as a dominant, so C is the expected reciting tone. These mode III Introits, however, use both G and C as reciting tones, and often begin with a decorated leap from G to C to establish this tonality. Similar examples exist throughout the repertory.\n\nThe earliest notated sources of Gregorian chant (written ca. 950) used symbols called \"neumes\" (Gr. sign, of the hand) to indicate tone-movements and relative duration within each syllable. A sort of musical stenography that seems to focus on gestures and tone-movements but not the specific pitches of individual notes, nor the relative starting pitches of each neume. Given the fact that Chant was learned in an oral tradition in which the texts and melodies were sung from memory, this was obviously not necessary. The neumatic manuscripts display great sophistication and precision in notation and a wealth of graphic signs to indicate the musical gesture and proper pronunciation of the text.\nScholars postulate that this practice may have been derived from cheironomic hand-gestures, the ekphonetic notation of Byzantine chant, punctuation marks, or diacritical accents. Later adaptations and innovations included the use of a dry-scratched line or an inked line or two lines, marked C or F showing the relative pitches between neumes. Consistent relative heightening first developed in the Aquitaine region, particularly at St. Martial de Limoges, in the first half of the eleventh century. Many German-speaking areas, however, continued to use unpitched neumes into the twelfth century. Additional symbols developed, such as the \"custos\", placed at the end of a system to show the next pitch. Other symbols indicated changes in articulation, duration, or tempo, such as a letter \"t\" to indicate a tenuto. Another form of early notation used a system of letters corresponding to different pitches, much as Shaker music is notated.\nBy the 13th century, the neumes of Gregorian chant were usually written in \"square notation\" on a four-line staff with a clef, as in the \"Graduale Aboense\" pictured above. In square notation, small groups of ascending notes on a syllable are shown as stacked squares, read from bottom to top, while descending notes are written with diamonds read from left to right. When a syllable has a large number of notes, a series of smaller such groups of neumes are written in succession, read from left to right. The oriscus, quilisma, and liquescent neumes indicate special vocal treatments, that have been largely neglected due to uncertainty as to how to sing them. Since the 1970s, with the influential insights of Dom Eugène Cardine (see below under 'rhythm'), ornamental neumes have received more attention from both researchers and performers.\nB-flat is indicated by a \"b-mollum\" (Lat. soft), a rounded undercaste 'b' placed to the left of the entire neume in which the note occurs, as shown in the \"Kyrie\" to the right. When necessary, a \"b-durum\" (Lat. hard), written squarely, indicates B-natural and serves to cancel the b-mollum. This system of square notation is standard in modern chantbooks.\n\nGregorian chant was originally used for singing the Office (by male and female religious) and for singing the parts of the Mass pertaining to the lay faithful (male and female), the celebrant (priest, always male) and the choir (composed of male ordained clergy, except in convents). Outside the larger cities, the number of available clergy dropped, and lay men started singing these parts. The choir was considered an official liturgical duty reserved to clergy, so women were not allowed to sing in the \"Schola Cantorum\" or other choirs except in convents where women were permitted to sing the Office and the parts of the Mass pertaining to the choir as a function of their consecrated life.\n\nChant was normally sung in unison. Later innovations included \"tropes\", which is a new text sung to the same melodic phrases in a melismatic chant (repeating an entire Alleluia-melody on a new text for instance, or repeating a full phrase with a new text that comments on the previously sung text) and various forms of \"organum\", (improvised) harmonic embellishment of chant melodies focusing on octaves, fifths, fourths, and, later, thirds. Neither tropes nor organum, however, belong to the chant repertory proper. The main exception to this is the sequence, whose origins lay in troping the extended melisma of Alleluia chants known as the jubilus, but the sequences, like the tropes, were later officially suppressed. The Council of Trent struck sequences from the Gregorian corpus, except those for Easter, Pentecost, Corpus Christi and All Souls' Day.\n\nNot much is known about the particular vocal stylings or performance practices used for Gregorian chant in the Middle Ages. On occasion, the clergy was urged to have their singers perform with more restraint and piety. This suggests that virtuosic performances occurred, contrary to the modern stereotype of Gregorian chant as slow-moving mood music. This tension between musicality and piety goes far back; Gregory the Great himself criticized the practice of promoting clerics based on their charming singing rather than their preaching. However, Odo of Cluny, a renowned monastic reformer, praised the intellectual and musical virtuosity to be found in chant:\n\nTrue antiphonal performance by two alternating choruses still occurs, as in certain German monasteries. However, antiphonal chants are generally performed in responsorial style by a solo cantor alternating with a chorus. This practice appears to have begun in the Middle Ages. Another medieval innovation had the solo cantor sing the opening words of responsorial chants, with the full chorus finishing the end of the opening phrase. This innovation allowed the soloist to fix the pitch of the chant for the chorus and to cue the choral entrance.\n\nGiven the oral teaching tradition of Gregorian chant, modern reconstruction of intended rhythm from the written notation of Gregorian chant has always been a source of debate among modern scholars. To complicate matters further, many ornamental neumes used in the earliest manuscripts pose difficulties on the interpretation of rhythm. Certain neumes such as the \"pressus\", pes quassus, strophic neumes may indicate repeated notes, lengthening by repercussion, in some cases with added ornaments. By the 13th century, with the widespread use of square notation, most chant was sung with an approximately equal duration allotted to each note, although Jerome of Moravia cites exceptions in which certain notes, such as the final notes of a chant, are lengthened.\n\nWhile the standard repertory of Gregorian Chant was partly being supplanted with new forms of polyphony, the earlier melo-rhythmic refinements of monophonic chant seem to fall into disuse. Later redactions such as the \"Editio medicaea\" of 1614 rewrote chant so that melismata, with their melodic accent, fell on accented syllables. This aesthetic held sway until the re-examination of chant in the late 19th century by such scholars as Wagner, Pothier, and Mocquereau, who fell into two camps.\n\nOne school of thought, including Wagner, Jammers, and Lipphardt, advocated imposing rhythmic meters on chants, although they disagreed on how that should be done. An opposing interpretation, represented by Pothier and Mocquereau, supported a free rhythm of equal note values, although some notes are lengthened for textual emphasis or musical effect. The modern Solesmes editions of Gregorian chant follow this interpretation. Mocquereau divided melodies into two- and three-note phrases, each beginning with an \"ictus\", akin to a beat, notated in chantbooks as a small vertical mark. These basic melodic units combined into larger phrases through a complex system expressed by cheironomic hand-gestures. This approach prevailed during the twentieth century, propagated by Justine Ward's program of music education for children, until the liturgical role of chant was diminished after the liturgical reforms of Paul VI, and new scholarship \"essentially discredited\" Mocquereau's rhythmic theories.\n\nCommon modern practice favors performing Gregorian chant with no beat or regular metric accent, largely for aesthetic reasons. The text determines the accent while the melodic contour determines the phrasing. The note lengthenings recommended by the Solesmes school remain influential, though not prescriptive.\n\nDom Eugene Cardine, (1905–1988) monk from Solesmes, published his 'Semiologie Gregorienne' in 1970 in which he clearly explains the musical significance of the neumes of the early chant manuscripts. Cardine shows the great diversity of neumes and graphic variations of the basic shape of a particular neume, which can not be expressed in the square notation. This variety in notation must have served a practical purpose and therefore a musical significance. Nine years later, the Graduale Triplex was published, in which the Roman Gradual, containing all the chants for Mass in a Year's cycle, appeared with the neumes of the two most important manuscripts copied under and over the 4-line staff of the square notation. The Graduale Triplex made widely accessible the original notation of Sankt Gallen and Laon (compiled after 930 AD) in a single chantbook and was a huge step forward. Dom Cardine had many students who have each in their own way continued their semiological studies, some of whom also started experimenting in applying the newly understood principles in performance practice.\n\nThe studies of Cardine and his students (Godehard Joppich, Luigi Augustoni, Johannes B. Göschl, Marie-Noël Colette, Rupert Fischer, Marie-Claire Billecocq, Alexander M. Schweitzer to name a few) have clearly demonstrated that rhythm in Gregorian chant as notated in the 10th century rhythmic manuscripts (notably Skt. Gallen and Laon) manifest such rhythmic diversity and melodic – rhythmic ornamentations for which there is hardly a living performance tradition in the Western world. Contemporary groups that endeavour to sing according to the manuscript traditions have evolved after 1975. Some practising researchers favour a closer look at non Western (liturgical) traditions, in such cultures where the tradition of modal monophony was never abandoned.\n\nAnother group with different views are the mensuralists or the proportionalists, who maintain that rhythm has to be interpreted proportionately, where shorts are exactly half the longs. This school of interpretation claims the support of historical authorities such as St Augustine, Remigius, Guido and Aribo. This view is advocated by John Blackley and his 'Schola Antiqua New York'.\n\nRecent research in the Netherlands by Dr. Dirk van Kampen has indicated that the authentic rhythm of Gregorian chant in the 10th century includes both proportional elements and elements that are in agreement with semiology. Starting with the expectation that the rhythm of Gregorian chant (and thus the duration of the individual notes) anyway adds to the expressivity of the sacred Latin texts, several word-related variables were studied for their relationship with several neume-related variables, exploring these relationships in a sample of introit chants using such statistical methods as correlational analysis and multiple regression analysis.\n\nBeside the length of the syllables (measured in tenths of seconds), each text syllable was evaluated in terms of its position within the word to which it belongs, defining such variables as \"the syllable has or has not the main accent\", \"the syllable is or is not at the end of a word\", etc., and in terms of the particular sounds produced (for instance, the syllable contains the vowel \"i\"). The various neume elements were evaluated by attaching different duration values to them, both in terms of semiological propositions (nuanced durations according to the manner of neume writing in Chris Hakkennes’ Graduale Lagal), and in terms of fixed duration values that were based on mensuralistic notions, however with ratios between short and long notes ranging from 1 : 1, via 1 : 1.2, 1 : 1.4, etc. to 1 : 3. To distinguish short and long notes, tables were consulted that were established by Van Kampen in an unpublished comparative study regarding the neume notations according to St Gallen and Laon codices. With some exceptions, these tables confirm the short vs. long distinctions in Cardine’s 'Semiologie Gregorienne'.\n\nThe lengths of the neumes were given values by adding up the duration values for the separate neume elements, each time following a particular hypothesis concerning the rhythm of Gregoriant chant. Both the syllable lengths and the neume lengths were also expressed in relation to the total duration of the syllables, resp. neumes for a word (contextual variables). Correlating the various word and neume variables, substantial correlations were found for the word variables 'accented syllable' and 'contextual syllable duration'. Moreover, it could be established that the multiple correlation (\"R\") between the two types of variables reaches its maximum (\"R\" is about 0.80) if the neumatic elements are evaluated according to the following rules of duration: (a) neume elements that represent short notes in neumes consisting of at least two notes have duration values of 1 time; (b) neume elements that represent long notes in neumes consisting of at least two notes have duration values of 2 times; (c) neumes consisting of only one note are characterized by flexible duration values (with an average value of 2 times), which take over the duration values of the syllables to match.\n\nThe distinction between the first two rules and the latter rule can also be found in early treatises on music, introducing the terms \"metrum\" and \"rhythmus\". As it could also be demonstrated by Van Kampen that melodic peaks often coincide with the word accent (see also), the conclusion seems warranted that the Gregorian melodies enhance the expressiveness of the Latin words by mimicking to some extent both the accentuation of the sacred words (pitch differences between neumes) and the relative duration of the word syllables (by paying attention to well-defined length differences between the individual notes of a neume).\n\nDuring the seventeenth through nineteenth centuries in France, the system of rhythmic notation became standardized, with printers and editors of chant books employing only four rhythmic values. Recent research by Christopher Holman indicates that chants whose texts are in a regular meter could even be altered to be performed in Time signatures.\n\nRecent developments involve an intensifying of the semiological approach according to Dom Cardine, which also gave a new impetus to the research into melodic variants in various manuscripts of chant. On the basis of this ongoing research it has become obvious that the Graduale and other chantbooks contain many melodic errors, some very consistently, (the mis-interpretation of third and eighth mode) necessitating a new edition of the Graduale according to state-of-the-art melodic restitutions. Since the 1970 a melodic restitution group of AISCGre (International Society for the Study of Gregorian Chant) has worked on an \"editio magis critica\" as requested by the 2. Vatican Council Constitution \"Sacrosanctum Concilium\". As a response to this need and following the Holy See's invitation to edit a more critical edition, in 2011 the first volume \"De Dominicis et Festis\" of the \"Graduale Novum Editio Magis Critica Iuxta SC 117\"was published by Libreria Editrice Vatican and ConBrio Verlagsgesellschaft, Regensburg.\n\nIn this approach the so-called earlier 'rhythmic' manuscripts of unheightened neumes that carry a wealth of melo-rhythmic information but not of exact pitches, are compared in large tables of comparison with relevant later 'melodic' manuscripts' that are written on lines or use double alphabetic and neumes notation over the text, but as a rule have less rhythmic refinement compared to the earlier group. However, the comparison between the two groups has made it possible to correct what are obvious mistakes. In other instances it is not so easy to find a consensus. In 1984 Chris Hakkennes published his own transcription of the Graduale Triplex. He devised a new graphic adaptation of square notation 'simplex' in which he integrated the rhythmic indications of the two most relevant sources, that of Laon and Skt. Gallen.\n\nReferring to these manuscripts, he called his own transcription Gradual Lagal. Furthermore, while making the transcription, he cross-checked with the melodic manuscripts to correct modal errors or other melodic errors found in the Graduale Romanum. His intention was to provide a corrected melody in rhythmic notation but above all – he was also a choirmaster – suited for practical use, therefore a simplex, integrated notation. Although fully admitting the importance of Hakkennes' melodic revisions, the rhythmical solution suggested in the Graduale Lagal was actually found by Van Kampen (see above) to be rather modestly related to the text of the chant.\n\nGregorian chant is sung in the Office during the canonical hours and in the liturgy of the Mass. Texts known as \"accentus\" are intoned by bishops, priests, and deacons, mostly on a single reciting tone with simple melodic formulae at certain places in each sentence. More complex chants are sung by trained soloists and choirs. The Graduale Romanum contains the proper chants of the Mass (i.e., Introit, Gradual, Alleluia, Tract, Offertory, Communion) and the complete Kyriale (the collection of Mass Ordinary settings). The \"Liber usualis\" contains the chants for the Graduale Romanum and the most commonly used Office chants.\n\nThe Introit, Gradual, Alleluia, Tract, Sequence, Offertory and Communion chants are part of the Proper of the Mass. \"Proprium Missae\" in Latin refers to the chants of the Mass that have their proper individual texts for each Sunday throughout the annual cycle, as opposed to 'Ordinarium Missae' which have fixed texts (but various melodies) (Kyrie, Sanctus, Benedictus, Agnus Dei).\n\nIntroits cover the procession of the officiants. Introits are antiphonal chants, typically consisting of an antiphon, a psalm verse, a repeat of the antiphon, an intonation of the Gloria Patri Doxology, and a final repeat of the antiphon. Reciting tones often dominate their melodic structures.\n\nGraduals are responsorial chants that follow the reading of the Epistle. Graduals usually result from \"centonization\"; stock musical phrases are assembled like a patchwork to create the full melody of the chant, creating families of musically related melodies. Graduals are accompanied by an elaborate Verse, so that it actually consists in two different parts, A B. Often the first part is sung again, creating a 'rondeau' A B A. At least the verse, if not the complete gradual, is for the solo cantor and are in elaborate, ornate style with long, wide-ranged melismata.\n\nThe Alleluia is known for the \"jubilus\", an extended joyful melisma on the last vowel of 'Alleluia'. The Alleluia is also in two parts, the alleluia proper and the psalmverse, by which the Alleluia is identified (Alleluia V. Pascha nostrum). The last melisma of the verse is the same as the jubilus attached to the Alleluia. Alleluias are not sung during penitential times, such as Lent. Instead, a Tract is chanted, usually with texts from the Psalms. Tracts, like Graduals, are highly centonized.\n\nSequences are sung poems based on couplets. Although many sequences are not part of the liturgy and thus not part of the Gregorian repertory proper, Gregorian sequences include such well-known chants as \"Victimae paschali laudes\" and \"Veni Sancte Spiritus\". According to Notker Balbulus, an early sequence writer, their origins lie in the addition of words to the long melismata of the jubilus of Alleluia chants.\n\nOffertories are sung during the offering of Eucharistic bread and wine. Offertories once had highly prolix melodies in their verses, but the use of verses in Gregorian Offertories disappeared around the 12th century. These verses however, are among the most ornate and elaborated in the whole chant repertoire. Offertories are in form closest to Responsories, which are likewise accompanied by at least one Verse and the opening sections of both Off. and Resp. are partly repeated after the verse(s). This last section is therefore called the 'repetenda' and is in performance the last melodic line of the chant.\n\nCommunions are sung during the distribution of the Eucharist. In presentation the Communio is similar to the Introitus, an antiphon with a series of psalm verses. Communion melodies are often tonally ambiguous and do not fit into a single musical mode which has led to the same communio being classed in different modes in different manuscripts or editions.\n\nThe Kyrie, Gloria, Credo, Sanctus, Benedictus and Agnus Dei use the same text in every service of the Mass. Because they follow the regular invariable \"order\" of the Mass, these chants are called \"Ordinary\".\n\nThe Kyrie consists of a threefold repetition of \"Kyrie eleison\" (\"Lord, have mercy\"), a threefold repetition of \"Christe eleison\" (\"Christ have mercy\"), followed by another threefold repetition of \"Kyrie eleison.\" In older chants, \"Kyrie eleison imas\" (\"Lord, have mercy on us\") can be found. The Kyrie is distinguished by its use of the Greek language instead of Latin. Because of the textual repetition, various musical repeat structures occur in these chants. The following, Kyrie ad. lib. VI as transmitted in a Cambrai manuscript, uses the form ABA CDC EFE', with shifts in tessitura between sections. The E' section, on the final \"Kyrie eleison\", itself has an aa'b structure, contributing to the sense of climax.\nThe Gloria recites the Greater Doxology, and the Credo intones the Nicene Creed. Because of the length of these texts, these chants often break into musical subsections corresponding with textual breaks. Because the Credo was the last Ordinary chant to be added to the Mass, there are relatively few Credo melodies in the Gregorian corpus.\n\nThe Sanctus and the Agnus Dei, like the Kyrie, also contain repeated texts, which their musical structures often exploit.\n\nTechnically, the Ite missa est and the Benedicamus Domino, which conclude the Mass, belong to the Ordinary. They have their own Gregorian melodies, but because they are short and simple, and have rarely been the subject of later musical composition, they are often omitted in discussion.\n\nGregorian chant is sung in the canonical hours of the monastic Office, primarily in antiphons used to sing the Psalms, in the Great Responsories of Matins, and the Short Responsories of the Lesser Hours and Compline. The psalm antiphons of the Office tend to be short and simple, especially compared to the complex Great Responsories.\n\nAt the close of the Office, one of four \"Marian antiphons\" is sung. These songs, \"Alma Redemptoris Mater\" (see top of article), \"Ave Regina caelorum\", \"Regina caeli laetare\", and \"Salve, Regina\", are relatively late chants, dating to the 11th century, and considerably more complex than most Office antiphons. Willi Apel has described these four songs as \"among the most beautiful creations of the late Middle Ages.\"\n\nGregorian chant had a significant impact on the development of medieval and Renaissance music. Modern staff notation developed directly from Gregorian neumes. The square notation that had been devised for plainchant was borrowed and adapted for other kinds of music. Certain groupings of neumes were used to indicate repeating rhythms called rhythmic modes. Rounded noteheads increasingly replaced the older squares and lozenges in the 15th and 16th centuries, although chantbooks conservatively maintained the square notation. By the 16th century, the fifth line added to the musical staff had become standard. The bass clef and the flat, natural, and sharp accidentals derived directly from Gregorian notation.\n\nGregorian melodies provided musical material and served as models for tropes and liturgical dramas. Vernacular hymns such as \"Christ ist erstanden\" and \"Nun bitten wir den Heiligen Geist\" adapted original Gregorian melodies to translated texts. Secular tunes such as the popular Renaissance \"In Nomine\" were based on Gregorian melodies. Beginning with the improvised harmonizations of Gregorian chant known as organum, Gregorian chants became a driving force in medieval and Renaissance polyphony. Often, a Gregorian chant (sometimes in modified form) would be used as a \"cantus firmus\", so that the consecutive notes of the chant determined the harmonic progression. The Marian antiphons, especially \"Alma Redemptoris Mater\", were frequently arranged by Renaissance composers. The use of chant as a cantus firmus was the predominant practice until the Baroque period, when the stronger harmonic progressions made possible by an independent bass line became standard.\n\nThe Catholic Church later allowed polyphonic arrangements to replace the Gregorian chant of the Ordinary of the Mass. This is why the Mass as a compositional form, as set by composers like Palestrina or Mozart, features a Kyrie but not an Introit. The Propers may also be replaced by choral settings on certain solemn occasions. Among the composers who most frequently wrote polyphonic settings of the Propers were William Byrd and Tomás Luis de Victoria. These polyphonic arrangements usually incorporate elements of the original chant.\n\nThe monks of Solesmes, discussed above for their revival of Gregorian chant, issued a number of recordings. However, when Gregorian chant as plainchant experienced a popular resurgence during the new-age and world-music movements of the 1980s and '90s, the iconic album was somewhat unexpectedly \"Chant\", recorded by the Benedictine monks of Santo Domingo de Silos, Spain. This was marketed as music to inspire timeless calm and serenity. In 2008, the Cistercian Monks of Austrian Heiligenkreuz Abbey released the CD \"Chant – Music for Paradise\", which became the best-selling album of the Austrian pop charts and peaked #7 of the UK charts. In the US, the album was released under the title \"Chant – Music for the Soul\" and peaked at #4 on the Billboard classical charts.\n\nIt became conventional wisdom that listening to Gregorian chant increased the production of alpha waves in the brain, reinforcing the popular reputation of Gregorian chant as tranquilizing music. \n\n\n\n"}
{"id": "155656", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=155656", "title": "Royal mottos of Swedish monarchs", "text": "Royal mottos of Swedish monarchs\n\nThe royal motto of the Swedish monarch is a Swedish royal tradition stemming from the early 16th century. All reigning monarchs of Sweden, beginning with Gustav I, have had their own mottos during their respective periods of reign. The Swedish royal motto in many ways is equivalent to a national motto. The tradition among Swedish monarchs, in common with the Danish and Norwegian monarchies, but different from that of most other modern European monarchies, is that the motto is not the same for one dynasty, but is personal to each monarch. Historically the royal motto has been used in connection with the Swedish coat of arms, and until 30 June 2017 it could be seen in print on the 1 krona coin. The new generation of coins does not feature a motto.\n\nGustav III was the first king to have his motto only in Swedish. Up until Adolf Frederick, the motto for every regent had been in Latin and Swedish (or, as in the case of Gustav II Adolf, in German). Due to the dissolution of the union between Norway and Sweden in 1905, Oscar II had to change his motto.\n\n"}
{"id": "155687", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=155687", "title": "Ital", "text": "Ital\n\nItal, also spelled I-tal (), is food often celebrated by those in the Rastafari movement. It is compulsory in the Nyabinghi mansion though not in the Twelve Tribes of Israel or Remi mansions. The word derives from the English word \"vital\", with the initial \"v\" removed. This is done to many words in the Rastafari vocabulary to signify the unity of the speaker with all of nature. The expression of Ital eating varies widely from Rasta to Rasta, and there are few universal rules of Ital living.\n\nThe primary goal of adhering to an Ital diet is to increase Livity, or the life energy that Rastafari generally believe lives within all human beings, as conferred from the Almighty. A common tenet of Rastafari beliefs is the sharing of a central Livity among living things, and what is put into one's body should enhance Livity rather than reduce it. Though there are different interpretations of ital regarding specific foods, the general principle is that food should be natural, or pure, and from the earth; Rastafari therefore often avoid food which is chemically modified or contains artificial additives (e.g., colour, flavourings, and preservatives). Some also avoid added salt in foods, especially salt with the artificial addition of iodine, while pure sea or kosher salt is eaten by some. In strict interpretations, foods that have been produced using chemicals such as pesticides and fertilizer are not considered ital. Early adherents adopted their dietary laws based on their interpretation of several books of the Bible, including the Book of Genesis (\"Then God said, \"I give you every Seed-bearing plant on the face of the whole earth and every tree that has fruit with seed in it. They will be yours for food.\" (Genesis 1:29)), the books of Leviticus and Deuteronomy. Along with growing dreadlocks and the sacramental smoking of ganja, observing a vegetarian diet is one of the practices early Rastafari adopted from Indian indentured servants living in Jamaica. Rastafari's founder Leonard Howell, affectionately called \"Gong\" and \"Gyangunguru Maragh\", though not of Indian descent, was fascinated with Hindu practices and was instrumental in promoting a plant-based diet in the Rastafari community of Pinnacle.\n\nMost expressions of the Ital diet include adherence to a strict vegetarian diet. This is based in part on the belief that since meat is dead, eating it would therefore work against Livity elevation. It is also practiced because as strict adherents to natural living, Rastafarians often believe the human being is a natural vegetarian based on human physiology and anatomy. Some adherents to Ital diets are strict vegans, as they do not consider dairy to be natural for human consumption either.\n\nThe most strict interpretations also avoid the consumption of rock salt (sea salt can be substituted), and food that has been preserved by canning or drying, and even prohibit the use of metal cooking utensils. In this case, only clay and wood cooking pots, crockery, and cutlery are used. Few adherents of ital follow the strictest interpretation; some Rastafarians do not adhere to them at all.\n\nRastafarians do not approve of excessive alcohol consumption. However they can drink alcohol in moderation as long as it does not reach a level that clouds the mind or reduces their livity. Most Rastafari disapprove of cigarettes due to the serious health concerns associated with their use, and many Rastafari avoid coffee and other caffeinated beverages, though this is less common. In fact some Rastafari grow their own coffee, sugar, and chocolate.\n"}
{"id": "156520", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=156520", "title": "Udon", "text": "Udon\n\nThe flavour of broth and topping vary from region to region. Usually, dark brown broth, made from dark soy sauce (\"koikuchi shōyu\"), is used in eastern Japan, and light brown broth, made from light soy sauce (\"usukuchi shōyu\"), is used in western Japan. This is noticeable in packaged instant noodles, which are often sold in two different versions for east and west. \"Currynanban\" is another popular variation, served in curry broth.\n\nThere are many stories explaining the origin of udon.\n\nOne story says that in AD 1241, Enni, a Rinzai monk, introduced flour milling technology from Song China to Japan. Floured crops were then made into noodles such as udon, soba, and pancakes in Japan which were eaten by locals. Milling techniques were spread around the country.\n\nAnother story states that during the Nara period, a Japanese envoy was introduced to 14 kinds of confection while being in China during the Tang Dynasty. One of them was called , which was listed as in , a dictionary which was published in the Heian Era. The muginawa is believed to be an origin for many kinds of Japanese noodles. However, the muginawa in Shinsen Jikyō was made with wheat and rice flour.\n\nAnother story for udon claims that the original name of the noodle was \"konton\", which was made with wheat flour and sweet fillings.\n\nYet another story says that a Buddhist priest called Kukai introduced udon noodles to Shikoku during the Heian Era. Kūkai, the Buddhist priest, traveled to Tang China around the beginning of the 9th century to study. Sanuki Province claimed to have been the first to adopt udon noodles from Kūkai. Hakata claimed to have produced udon noodles based on Enni's recipe.\n\nUdon noodles are usually served chilled in the summer and hot in the winter. In the Edo period, the thicker wheat noodle was generally called udon, and served with a hot broth called . The chilled variety was called .\n\nCold udon, or udon salad, is usually mixed with egg omelette slices, shredded chicken and fresh vegetables, such as cucumber and radish. Toppings of Udon soup are chosen to reflect the seasons. Most toppings are added without much cooking, although there are also deep-fried tempura. Many of these dishes may also be prepared with soba.\n\n\n\nThere are wide variations in both thickness and shape for udon noodles.\n\n\nIn Korea, authentic Japanese udon dishes are served in numerous Japanese restaurants, while the Korean-style udon noodle soups are served in \"bunsikjip\" (snack bars) and \"pojangmacha\" (street stalls). Both types are called \"udong\" (), which is the transliteration of the Japanese word \"udon\" (). In Korea, the word \"udong\" refers to noodle dishes (typically noodle soup), while the noodles themselves are called \"udong-myeon\" (; \"udong noodles\") and considered a type of \"garak-guksu\" (; \"thick noodles\"). Common ingredients for \"udong\" noodle soup include crowndaisy greens and \"eomuk\" (fish cakes), both of which are not very common in Japanese \"udon\" dishes.\n\nThere is also a dish called \"udon\" in Palau, because of the former Japanese administration. The broth is soy sauce–based like Japanese udon. However, as there were many immigrants from Okinawa, it uses less broth like Okinawa soba. Most notably, the noodle is that of spaghetti, as it is easier to acquire there.\n\nThe Kagawa prefecture is famous all over Japan for its Sanuki udon (讃岐うどん). It is promoted to other regions of Japan through means such as original characters and souvenirs related to udon and movies in which udon is a main theme.\n"}
{"id": "156754", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=156754", "title": "Yogurt", "text": "Yogurt\n\nYogurt, yoghurt or yoghourt ( or ; from ) is a food produced by bacterial fermentation of milk. The bacteria used to make yogurt are known as \"yogurt cultures\". The fermentation of lactose by these bacteria produces lactic acid, which acts on milk protein to give yogurt its texture and characteristic tart flavor. Cow's milk is commonly available worldwide and, as such, is the milk most commonly used to make yogurt. Milk from water buffalo, goats, ewes, mares, camels, and yaks is also used to produce yogurt where available locally. The milk used may be homogenized or not, even pasteurized or raw. Each type of milk produces substantially different results.\n\nYogurt is produced using a culture of \"Lactobacillus delbrueckii\" subsp. \"bulgaricus\" and \"Streptococcus thermophilus\" bacteria. In addition, other lactobacilli and bifidobacteria are sometimes added during or after culturing yogurt. Some countries require yogurt to contain a certain amount of colony-forming units (CFU) of bacteria; in China, for example, the requirement for the number of lactobacillus bacteria is at least 1 million CFU per milliliter.\n\nTo produce yogurt, milk is first heated, usually to about 85 °C (185 °F), to denature the milk proteins so that they do not form curds. After heating, the milk is allowed to cool to about 45 °C (113 °F). The bacterial culture is mixed in, and that temperature of 45 °C is maintained for 4 to 12 hours to allow fermentation to occur.\n\nThe word is derived from , and is usually related to the verb \"yoğurmak\", \"to knead\", or \"to be curdled or coagulated; to thicken\". It may be related to \"yoğun\", meaning thick or dense. The sound ğ was traditionally rendered as \"gh\" in transliterations of Turkish from around 1615–1625. In modern Turkish the letter ğ marks a diaeresis between two vowels, without being pronounced itself, which is reflected in some languages' versions of the word (e.g. Greek γιαούρτι \"giaoúrti\", French \"yaourt\", Romanian \"iaurt\").\n\nIn English, the several variations of the spelling of the word include \"yogurt\", \"yoghurt\", and to a lesser extent \"yoghourt\" or \"yogourt\".\n\nAnalysis of the \"L. delbrueckii\" subsp. \"bulgaricus\" genome indicates that the bacterium may have originated on the surface of a plant. Milk may have become spontaneously and unintentionally exposed to it through contact with plants, or bacteria may have been transferred from the udder of domestic milk-producing animals. The origins of yogurt are unknown, but it is thought to have been invented in Mesopotamia around 5000 BC. In ancient Indian records, the combination of yogurt and honey is called \"the food of the gods\". Persian traditions hold that \"Abraham owed his fecundity and longevity to the regular ingestion of yogurt\".\nThe cuisine of ancient Greece included a dairy product known as oxygala () which is believed to have been a form of yogurt. Galen (AD 129 – c. 200/c. 216) mentioned that oxygala was consumed with honey, similar to the way thickened Greek yogurt is eaten today. The oldest writings mentioning yogurt are attributed to Pliny the Elder, who remarked that certain \"barbarous nations\" knew how \"to thicken the milk into a substance with an agreeable acidity\". The use of yogurt by medieval Turks is recorded in the books \"Dīwān Lughāt al-Turk\" by Mahmud Kashgari and \"Kutadgu Bilig\" by Yusuf Has Hajib written in the 11th century. Both texts mention the word \"yogurt\" in different sections and describe its use by nomadic Turks. The earliest yogurts were probably spontaneously fermented by wild bacteria in goat skin bags.\n\nSome accounts suggest that Mughal Indian emperor Akbar's cooks would flavor yogurt with mustard seeds and cinnamon. Another early account of a European encounter with yogurt occurs in French clinical history: Francis I suffered from a severe diarrhea which no French doctor could cure. His ally Suleiman the Magnificent sent a doctor, who allegedly cured the patient with yogurt. Being grateful, the French king spread around the information about the food that had cured him.\n\nUntil the 1900s, yogurt was a staple in diets of people in the Russian Empire (and especially Central Asia and the Caucasus), Western Asia, South Eastern Europe/Balkans, Central Europe, and the Indian subcontinent. Stamen Grigorov (1878–1945), a Bulgarian student of medicine in Geneva, first examined the microflora of the Bulgarian yogurt. In 1905, he described it as consisting of a spherical and a rod-like lactic acid-producing bacteria. In 1907, the rod-like bacterium was called \"Bacillus bulgaricus\" (now \"Lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus\"). The Russian Nobel laureate and biologist Ilya Mechnikov, from the Institut Pasteur in Paris, was influenced by Grigorov's work and hypothesized that regular consumption of yogurt was responsible for the unusually long lifespans of Bulgarian peasants. Believing \"Lactobacillus\" to be essential for good health, Mechnikov worked to popularize yogurt as a foodstuff throughout Europe.\n\nIsaac Carasso industrialized the production of yogurt. In 1919, Carasso, who was from Ottoman Salonika, started a small yogurt business in Barcelona, Spain, and named the business Danone (\"little Daniel\") after his son. The brand later expanded to the United States under an Americanized version of the name: Dannon. Yogurt with added fruit jam was patented in 1933 by the Radlická Mlékárna dairy in Prague.\n\nYogurt was introduced to the United States in the first decade of the twentieth century, influenced by Élie Metchnikoff's \"The Prolongation of Life; Optimistic Studies\" (1908); it was available in tablet form for those with digestive intolerance and for home culturing. It was popularized by John Harvey Kellogg at the Battle Creek Sanitarium, where it was used both orally and in enemas, and later by Armenian immigrants Sarkis and Rose Colombosian, who started \"Colombo and Sons Creamery\" in Andover, Massachusetts in 1929.\n\nColombo Yogurt was originally delivered around New England in a horse-drawn wagon inscribed with the Armenian word \"madzoon\" which was later changed to \"yogurt\", the Turkish language name of the product, as Turkish was the lingua franca between immigrants of the various Near Eastern ethnicities who were the main consumers at that time. Yogurt's popularity in the United States was enhanced in the 1950s and 1960s, when it was presented as a health food by scientists like Hungarian-born bacteriologist Stephen A. Gaymont. Plain yogurt still proved too sour for the American palate and in 1966 Colombo Yogurt sweetened the yogurt and added fruit preserves, creating \"fruit on the bottom\" style yogurt. This was extremely successful and company sales soon exceeded $1 million per year. By the late 20th century, yogurt had become a common American food item and Colombo Yogurt was sold in 1993 to General Mills, which discontinued the brand in 2010.\n\nYogurt (plain yogurt from whole milk) is 81% water, 9% protein, 5% fat, and 4% carbohydrates, including 4% sugars (table). A 100-gram amount provides of dietary energy. As a proportion of the Daily Value (DV), a serving of yogurt is a rich source of vitamin B (31% DV) and riboflavin (23% DV), with moderate content of protein, phosphorus, and selenium (14 to 19% DV; table).\nTilde (~) represents missing or incomplete data. \nThe above shows little difference exists between whole milk and yogurt made from whole milk with respect to the listed nutritional constituents.\n\nBecause it may contain live cultures, yogurt is often associated with probiotics, which have been postulated as having positive effects on immune, cardiovascular or metabolic health. But high-quality clinical evidence is insufficient to conclude that consuming yogurt lowers the risk of diseases or otherwise improves health.\n\n\"Dahi\" is a yogurt from the Indian subcontinent, known for its characteristic taste and consistency. The word \"dahi\" seems to be derived from the Sanskrit word \"dadhi\" (\"sour milk\"), one of the five elixirs, or panchamrita, often used in Hindu ritual. Sweetened dahi (\"mishti doi\" or \"meethi dahi\") is common in eastern parts of India, made by fermenting sweetened milk. While cow's milk is considered sacred and is currently the primary ingredient for yogurt, goat and buffalo milk were widely used in the past, and valued for the fat content (see buffalo curd).\n\nDadiah or dadih is a traditional West Sumatran yogurt made from water buffalo milk, fermented in bamboo tubes. Yogurt is common in Nepal, where it is served as both an appetizer and dessert. Locally called \"dahi\", it is a part of the Nepali culture, used in local festivals, marriage ceremonies, parties, religious occasions, family gatherings, and so on. One Nepalese yogurt is called \"juju dhau\", originating from the city of Bhaktapur. In Tibet, yak milk (technically dri milk, as the word yak refers to the male animal) is made into yogurt (and butter and cheese) and consumed.\n\nIn Northern Iran, \"Mâst Chekide\" is a variety of kefir yogurt with a distinct sour taste. It is usually mixed with a pesto-like water and fresh herb purée called delal. Common appetizers are spinach or eggplant borani, \"Mâst-o-Khiâr\" with cucumber, spring onions and herbs, and \"Mâst-Musir\" with wild shallots. In the summertime, yogurt and ice cubes are mixed together with cucumbers, raisins, salt, pepper and onions and topped with some croutons made of Persian traditional bread and served as a cold soup. Ashe-Mâst is a warm yogurt soup with fresh herbs, spinach and lentils. Even the leftover water extracted when straining yogurt is cooked to make a sour cream sauce called kashk, which is usually used as a topping on soups and stews.\n\nMatsoni is a Georgian yogurt in the Caucasus and Russia. Tarator and Cacık are cold soups made from yogurt during summertime in eastern Europe. They are made with ayran, cucumbers, dill, salt, olive oil, and optionally garlic and ground walnuts. Tzatziki in Greece and milk salad in Bulgaria are thick yogurt-based salads similar to tarator.\n\nKhyar w Laban (cucumber and yogurt salad) is a dish in Lebanon and Syria. Also, a wide variety of local Lebanese and Syrian dishes are cooked with yogurt like \"Kibbi bi Laban\" Rahmjoghurt, a creamy yogurt with much higher fat content (10%) than many yogurts offered in English-speaking countries. Dovga, a yogurt soup cooked with a variety of herbs and rice, is served warm in winter or refreshingly cold in summer. Jameed, yogurt salted and dried to preserve it, is consumed in Jordan. Zabadi is the type of yogurt made in Egypt, usually from the milk of the Egyptian water buffalo. It is particularly associated with Ramadan fasting, as it is thought to prevent thirst during all-day fasting.\n\nTo offset its natural sourness, yogurt is also sold sweetened, sweetened and flavored or in containers with fruit or fruit jam on the bottom. The two styles of yogurt commonly found in the grocery store are set-style yogurt and Swiss-style yogurt. Set-style yogurt is poured into individual containers to set, while Swiss-style yogurt is stirred prior to packaging. Either may have fruit added to increase sweetness.\n\nLassi and moru are common beverages in India. Lassi is stirred liquified curd that is either salted or sweetened with sugar commonly, less commonly honey and often combined with fruit pulp to create flavored lassi. Mango lassi is a western favorite, as is coconut lassi. Consistency can vary widely, with urban and commercial lassis being of uniform texture through being processed, whereas rural and rustic lassi has curds in it, and sometimes has malai (cream) added or removed. Moru is a South Indian summer drink, meant to keep drinkers hydrated through the hot and humid summers of the South. It is prepared by considerably thinning down yogurt with water, adding salt (for electrolyte balance) and spices, usually green chili peppers, asafoetida, curry leaves and mustard.\n\nLarge amounts of sugar – or other sweeteners for low-energy yogurts – are often used in commercial yogurt. Some yogurts contain added modified starch, pectin (found naturally in fruit), and/or gelatin to create thickness and creaminess artificially at lower cost. This type of yogurt is also marketed under the name Swiss-style, although it is unrelated to the way yogurt is eaten in Switzerland. Some yogurts, often called \"cream line\", are made with whole milk which has not been homogenized so the cream rises to the top. In the UK, Ireland, France and United States, sweetened, flavored yogurt is common, typically sold in single-serving plastic cups. Common flavors include vanilla, honey, and toffee, and fruit such as strawberry, cherry, blueberry, blackberry, raspberry, mango and peach. In the early twenty-first century yogurt flavors inspired by desserts, such as chocolate or cheesecake, have been available.\nThere is concern about the health effects of sweetened yogurt, due to its high sugar content.\n\nStrained yogurt has been strained through a filter, traditionally made of muslin and more recently of paper or non-muslin cloth. This removes the whey, giving a much thicker consistency. Strained yogurt is made at home, especially if using skimmed milk which results in a thinner consistency. Yogurt that has been strained to filter or remove the whey is known as Labneh in Middle Eastern countries. It has a consistency between that of yogurt and cheese. It may be used for sandwiches in Middle Eastern countries. Olive oil, cucumber slices, olives, and various green herbs may be added. It can be thickened further and rolled into balls, preserved in olive oil, and fermented for a few more weeks. It is sometimes used with onions, meat, and nuts as a stuffing for a variety of pies or kibbeh balls.\n\nSome types of strained yogurts are boiled in open vats first, so that the liquid content is reduced. The East Indian dessert, a variation of traditional dahi called mishti dahi, offers a thicker, more custard-like consistency, and is usually sweeter than western yogurts. Strained yogurt is also enjoyed in Greece and is the main component of \"tzatziki\" (from Turkish \"cacık\"), a well-known accompaniment to gyros and souvlaki pita sandwiches: it is a yogurt sauce or dip made with the addition of grated cucumber, olive oil, salt and, optionally, mashed garlic. Srikhand, a dessert in India, is made from strained yogurt, saffron, cardamom, nutmeg and sugar and sometimes fruits such as mango or pineapple.\n\nIn North America and Britain, strained yogurt is commonly called “Greek yogurt”. Strained yogurt is sometimes marketed in North America as \"Greek yogurt\" and in Britain as \"Greek-style yogurt\". In Britain the name \"Greek\" may only be applied to yogurt made in Greece.\n\nAyran, doogh (\"dawghe\" in Neo-Aramaic) or dhallë is a yogurt-based, salty drink. It is made by mixing yogurt with water and (sometimes) salt.\n\nBorhani (or burhani) is a spicy yogurt drink from Bangladesh. It is usually served with kacchi biryani at weddings and special feasts. Key ingredients are yogurt blended with mint leaves (mentha), mustard seeds and black rock salt (Kala Namak). Ground roasted cumin, ground white pepper, green chili pepper paste and sugar are often added.\n\nLassi is a yogurt-based beverage that is usually slightly salty or sweet, and may be commercially flavored with rosewater, mango or other fruit juice. Salty lassi is usually flavored with ground, roasted cumin and red chilies, may be made with buttermilk.\n\nAn unsweetened and unsalted yogurt drink usually called simply \"jogurt\" is consumed with \"burek\" and other baked goods. Sweetened yogurt drinks are the usual form in Europe (including the UK) and the US, containing fruit and added sweeteners. These are typically called \"drinkable yogurt\". Also available are \"yogurt smoothies\", which contain a higher proportion of fruit and are more like smoothies.\n\nA variety of plant-milk yogurts appeared in the 2000s, using soy milk, rice milk, and nut milks such as almond milk and coconut milk. These yogurts are suitable for vegans, people with intolerance to dairy milk, and those who prefer plant-based products.\n\nYogurt is made by heating milk to a temperature that denaturates its proteins (scalding), essential for making yogurt, cooling it to a temperature that will not kill the live microorganisms that turn the milk into yogurt, inoculating certain bacteria (starter culture), usually \"Streptococcus thermophilus\" and \"Lactobacillus bulgaricus\", into the milk, and finally keeping it warm for several hours. The milk may be held at for a few minutes, or boiled (giving a somewhat different result). It must be cooled to or somewhat less, typically . Starter culture must then be mixed in well, and the mixture must be kept undisturbed and warm for some time, anywhere between 5 and 12 hours. Longer fermentation times produces a more acidic yogurt. The starter culture may be a small amount of live (not sterilized) existing yogurt or commercially available dried starter culture.\n\nMilk with a higher concentration of solids than normal milk may be used; the higher solids content produces a firmer yogurt. Solids can be increased by adding dried milk. The yogurt-making process provides two significant barriers to pathogen growth, heat and acidity (low pH). Both are necessary to ensure a safe product. Acidity alone has been questioned by recent outbreaks of food poisoning by \"\" that is acid-tolerant. \"E. coli O157:H7\" is easily destroyed by pasteurization (heating); the initial heating of the milk kills pathogens as well as denaturing proteins. The microorganisms that turn milk into yogurt can tolerate higher temperatures than most pathogens, so that a suitable temperature not only encourages the formation of yogurt, but inhibits pathogenic microorganisms. Once the yogurt has formed it can, if desired, be strained to reduce the whey content and thicken it.\n\nTwo types of yogurt are supported by the Codex Alimentarius for import and export, implemented similarly by the US Food and Drug Administration.\n\n\nResearch suggests Homemade Yogurt and Live Yogurt are much more beneficial than 'Heat Treated Fermented Milk' (Pasteurized Yogurt). European Food Safety Authority has confirmed the probiotic benefits of Yogurt containing 10 CFU 'live Lactobacilli' \n\nLactose intolerance is a condition in which people have symptoms due to the decreased ability to digest lactose, a sugar found in dairy products. In 2010, the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) determined that lactose intolerance can be alleviated by ingesting live yogurt cultures (lactobacilli) that are able to digest the lactose in other dairy products. The scientific review by EFSA enabled yogurt manufacturers to use a health claim on product labels, provided that the \"yogurt should contain at least 10 CFU live starter microorganisms (\"Lactobacillus delbrueckii\" subsp. \"bulgaricus\" and \"Streptococcus thermophilus\") per gram. The target population is individuals with lactose maldigestion.\"\n\n"}
{"id": "157973", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=157973", "title": "Knäck", "text": "Knäck\n\nKnäck or Christmas Butterscotch is a traditional Swedish toffee prepared at Christmas. The name translates into \"break\" and refers to its hard consistency (reminiscent of Daim or Skor bars). Some prefer their knäck to be soft and chewy, which is easily attainable by simmering the mix for a shorter time.\n\nA common recipe is equal parts (typically 0.3 litres) of heavy cream (not whipped), sugar and golden syrup (or Swedish light syrup, \"ljus sirap\"). It is also common to add a few tablespoons of butter. One may also add 5 or 10 grams (1-2 tsp) of vanilla sugar or about 0.1 kg of peeled and finely chopped almonds. Put all the ingredients except for the almonds in a heavy based saucepan and stir until the sugar has melted. Simmer until a few drops of the mix poured into cold water can be rolled into a chewy or hard ball. Then add the almonds and pour the mixture in waxed paper cups and leave to cool. Even though the recipe is easy, the process of simmering can take up to 1.5 hours.\n"}
{"id": "158225", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=158225", "title": "Tensoba", "text": "Tensoba\n\nTensoba, or Tempura Soba is a Japanese dish of soba noodles and tempura.\n\nThere are two varieties of tensoba. One is served with hot broth using dashi and soy sauce, and the other one is served with cooled soba and dipped in chilled/hot tsukejiru (lit. dipping sauce), usually strongly flavored.\n\nThe dipping variety is also called 'Tenzaru-soba' or 'Ten-seiro,' depending on the soba shop or stand.\n\nThe origin of Tensoba is developed in mid-Edo-period, which story said that tensoba is begun to eat hot broth soba with kakiage, using adductor muscle of surf clam. In that period, shrimp-tempura soba is more expensive than other ingredients. So, shrimp-tempura-soba is also called 'Jo-tempura soba' (lit. upper class tempura-soba) or 'Ebiten-soba'. And just like Tendon, tensoba uses many kind of vegetable or seafood tempura, or kakiage (lit. scratch tempura, using plural ingredients mixture of vegetable bits and/or seafood bits).\nThere are some regional varieties for tensoba toppings.\nIn Kanto and Kyushu, the soba shops often use satsuma age (fried fish cake) or chikuwa as tempura. And those two fish cakes are sometimes batter-fried.\n"}
{"id": "158442", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=158442", "title": "Buzzword", "text": "Buzzword\n\nA buzzword is a word or phrase, new or already existing, that becomes very popular for a period of time. Buzzwords often derive from technical terms yet often have much of the original technical meaning removed through fashionable use, being simply used to impress others; although such \"buzzwords\" may still have the full meaning when used in certain technical contexts.\nBuzzwords often originate in jargon, acronyms, or neologisms. Examples of overworked business buzzwords include \"synergy, vertical, dynamic, cyber\" and \"strategy\"; a common buzzword phrase is \"\"think outside the box\"\".\n\nIt has been stated that businesses could not operate without buzzwords, as they are shorthands or internal shortcuts that make perfect sense to people informed of the context. However, a useful buzzword can become co-opted into general popular speech and lose its usefulness. According to management professor Robert Kreitner, \"Buzzwords are the literary equivalent of Gresham's Law. They will drive out good ideas.\"\nBuzzwords can also be seen in business as a way to make people feel like they are all on the same plane. As most workplaces use a specialized jargon, which could be argued is another form of buzzwords, it allows quicker communication. Indeed, many new hires feel more like \"part of the team\" the quicker they learn the buzzwords of their new workplace. Buzzwords permeate people's working lives so much that many don't realise that they are using them. The vice president of CSC Index, Rich DeVane, notes that buzzwords describe not only a trend, but also what can be considered a \"ticket of entry\" with regards to being considered as a successful organization – \"What people find tiresome is each consulting firm's attempt to put a different spin on it. That's what gives bad information.\"\n\nBuzzwords also feature prominently in politics, where they can result in a process which \"privileges rhetoric over reality, producing policies that are 'operationalized' first and only 'conceptualized' at a later date\". The resulting political speech is known for \"eschewing reasoned debate (as characterized by the use of evidence and structured argument), instead employing language exclusively for the purposes of control and manipulation\".\n\nThe \"Concise Oxford English Dictionary\" defines a buzzword (hyphenating the term as \"buzz-word\") as a slogan, or as a fashionable piece of jargon: a chic, fashionable, voguish, trendy word a la mode.\n\nIt has been asserted that buzzwords do not simply appear, they are created by a group of people working within a business as a means to generate hype. Buzzwords are most closely associated with management and have become the vocabulary that is known as \"management speak\": Using a pompous or magisterial term, of or relating to a particular subject employed to impress those outside of the field of expertise.\nIt could also be called buzz phrase or loaded word.\n\nWhat this means is that when a manager uses a said buzzword, most other people do not hear the meaning, and instead just see it as a buzzword. However it has been said that buzzwords are almost a \"necessary evil\" of management, as a way to inspire their team, but also stroke their own egos. With that being said, a buzzword is not necessarily a bad thing, as many disciplines thrive with the introduction of new terms which can be called buzzwords. These can also cross over into pop culture and indeed even into everyday life. With media channels now operating through many mediums, such as television, radio, print and increasingly digital (especially with the rise of social media), a \"buzzword\" can catch on and rapidly be adapted through the world.\n\nThe origin of buzzwords can be seen in as coming from business students studying at Harvard University as a way to help them gain better results from their studies. Such language terms were collated and then became what is known today as \"buzzwords\". During the early years of buzzwords, buzzwords were used by students as a means to enable them to quickly recall items of importance. As an example, \"If his analysis does not highlight the most important problems he has 'poor focus', and if he fails to emphasize important recommendations he will be accused of 'tinkering'. If the sequence for the 'implementation' of the recommendations is not good it is a matter of 'poor timing'. To succeed, the student must 'get on top of the problem'. He must 'hit the problem' and not 'shadow box' it. If he cannot do these things he might just as well 'turn in his suit'\".\n\nStudents have used many different buzzwords to describe the situation that they are in, and how this might affect a moment in their everyday life. From studying these business students, noticed that business students could speak with apparent authority. It also seemed as if using the right buzzword was more important than what the student came up with as an answer. Buzzwords have a strong impact on business culture and are commonly used in business speak.\n\nJon Keegan of the \"Wall Street Journal\" has published a Business Buzzwords Generator, which allows readers to use a randomizer to assemble \"meaningless business phrases using overused business buzzwords\" – for example, \"This product will incentivize big data and demonstrate innovative performance in the playing field.\"\n\n\"Forbes\" hosts an annual \"Jargon Madness\" game, in which 32 of \"corporate America's most insufferable expressions\" are played off against each other in a bracketed, basketball-style tournament to determine the buzzword of the year.\n\nLinkedIn publishes an annual list of buzzwords to avoid in creating résumés – \"trite, empty words that may sound good to your ear but say almost nothing\". The 2014 list: \"motivated\", \"passionate\", \"creative\", \"driven\", \"extensive experience\", \"responsible\", \"strategic\", \"track record\", \"organizational\", and \"expert\".\n\nWhen people are approaching a meeting where they expect the presenters to use many buzzwords, they will prepare a game of buzzword bingo, where players score points each time a particular buzzword is used. \n\nPatch Products has published a board game called \"Buzz Word\".\n\nThe \"Weird Al\" Yankovic album \"Mandatory Fun\" contains the song \"Mission Statement\", which is a long list of essentially meaningless buzzwords.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "159187", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=159187", "title": "Apple pie", "text": "Apple pie\n\nAn apple pie or apple tart (UK) is a pie or a tart, in which the principal filling ingredient is apple. It is, on occasion, served with whipped cream or ice cream on top, (which is known as apple pie a la mode), or with cheddar cheese. The pastry is generally used top-and-bottom, making it a double-crust pie; the upper crust may be a circular or a pastry lattice woven of crosswise strips. Depending on the baker's preference, the bottom of the double-crust may be baked first (before baking the whole pie) to prevent the bottom from getting soggy. Exceptions are deep-dish apple pie, with a top crust only, and open-face Tarte Tatin. Apple pie is an unofficial symbol of the United States and one of its signature comfort foods.\n\nApple pie can be made with many different sorts of apples. The more popular cooking apples include, Braeburn, Gala, Cortland, Bramley, Empire, Northern Spy, Granny Smith, and McIntosh. The fruit for the pie can be fresh, canned, or reconstituted from dried apples. These different types of apples (canned, dried, fresh) affects the final texture and the length of cooking time required will vary, therefore people disagree on if it affects the flavour or not. Dried or preserved apples were originally substituted only at times when fresh fruit was unavailable. Along with the apples people commonly use, cinnamon, salt, butter, and most importantly sugar. Though most of the old recipes don't include sugar due to the price or having a better sweetener option, most people definitely use it today.\nApple pie is often served in the style of \"\"à la Mode\"\" (topped with ice cream). Alternatively, a piece of sharp cheddar cheese is, at times, placed on top of or alongside a slice of the finished pie. Apple pie with cheddar is popular in the American Midwest and New England, particularly in Vermont, where it is considered the state dish.\n\nA commercially-prepared apple pie is 52% water, 34% carbohydrates, 2% protein, and 11% fat (table). A 100-gram serving supplies 237 Calories and 13% of the US recommended Daily Value of sodium, with no other micronutrients in significant content (table).\n\nRecipes for Dutch apple pie go back to the Middle Ages. An early Dutch cookbook from 1514, \"Een notabel boecxken van cokeryen\" (\"A notable little cookery book\"), documents a recipe for \"Appeltaerten\" (compare modern Dutch \"Appeltaarten\" \"apple pies\"). This early recipe was a simple one, requiring only a standard pie crust, slices of especially soft apples with their skin and seeds removed, and \"den selven deeghe daer die taerte af ghemaect es\" (roughly meaning \"the same dough that the pie [crust] is made of\") to fill in the top. It was then baked in a typical Dutch oven. Once baked, the top crust (except at the edges) would be cut out from the middle, after which the apple slices were potentially put through a sieve before the pie was stirred with a wooden spoon. At this point the book recommends adding several spices to the pie, namely: cardamom, ginger, cinnamon, nutmeg, clove, mace and powdered sugar. Finally, after mixing the ingredients into the pie with cream, it is once again put into the oven to dry.\n\nTraditional Dutch apple pie comes in two varieties, a crumb (\"appelkruimeltaart\") and a lattice (\"appeltaart\") style pie. Both recipes are distinct in that they typically call for flavourings of cinnamon and lemon juice to be added and differ in texture, not taste. Dutch apple pies may include ingredients such as full-cream butter, raisins and almond paste, in addition to ingredients such as apples and sugar, which they have in common with other recipes.\n\nThe basis of Dutch apple pie is a crust on the bottom and around the edges. This crust is then filled with pieces or slices of apple, usually a crisp and mildly tart variety such as Goudreinet or Elstar. Cinnamon and sugar are generally mixed in with the apple filling. Atop the filling, strands of dough cover the pie in a lattice holding the filling in place but keeping it visible or cover the pie with crumbs. It can be eaten warm or cold, sometimes with a dash of whipped cream or vanilla ice cream. In the US, \"Dutch apple pie\" refers specifically to the apple pie style with a crumb, streusel, topping.\n\nEnglish apple pie recipes go back to the time of Chaucer. The 1381 recipe (see illustration at right) is the earliest known apple pie recipe in the world, and lists the ingredients as \"good apples, good spices, figs, raisins and pears.\" The \"cofyn\" of the recipe is a casing of pastry. Saffron is used for colouring the pie filling. Today, the English style incorporates generous layers of sweetened slices of, usually, Bramley apple; layered into a dome shape to allow for downward shrinkage, and thus avoid a saggy middle, then topped with butter or lard shortcrust pastry, and baked until the apple filling is cooked.\n\nIn English-speaking countries, apple pie, often classified as a satisfying 'comfort' food, is a dessert of enduring popularity, whether it's eaten hot or cold, on its own or with ice cream, double cream, or custard.\n\nOne kind of French style apple pie is very different compared to the American version of the sweet dessert. Instead of it being right side up with crust on top and bottom, it actually is upside down, with the fruit being caramelized. This can be made not only with apples but other fruits or vegetables as well, for example, pears or tomatoes.\n\"See Tarte Tatin.\"\n\nOthers use a more traditional presentation, including variants like the Norman tart.\n\nThe Swedish style apple pie is predominantly a variety of apple crumble, rather than a traditional pastry pie. Often, breadcrumbs are used (wholly or partially) instead of flour, and sometimes rolled oats. It is usually flavoured with cinnamon and served with vanilla custard or ice cream. There is also a very popular version called \"äppelkaka\" (apple cake), which differs from the pie in that it is a sponge cake baked with fresh apple pieces in it. \n\nApple pie was brought to the colonies by the English, the Dutch, and the Swedes during the 17th and 18th centuries. The apple pie had to wait for the planting of European varieties, brought across the Atlantic, to become fruit-bearing apple trees, to be selected for their cooking qualities as there were no native apples except crabapples, which yield very small and sour fruit. In the meantime, the colonists were more likely to make their pies, or \"pasties\", from meat, calling them coffins (meaning basket) rather than fruit; and the main use for apples, once they were available, was in cider. However, there are American apple pie recipes, both manuscript and printed, from the 18th century, and it has since become a very popular dessert. Apple varieties are usually propagated by grafting, as clones, but in the New World, planting from seeds was more popular, which quickly led to the development of hundreds of new native varieties.\n\nApple pie was a common food in 18th-century Delaware. As noted by the New Sweden historian Dr. Israel Acrelius in a letter: \"Apple pie is used throughout the whole year, and when fresh Apples are no longer to be had, dried ones are used. It is the evening meal of children.\"\n\nThe mock apple pie, made from crackers, was probably invented for use aboard ships, as it was known to the British Royal Navy as early as 1812. The earliest known published recipes for mock apple pie date from the antebellum period of the 1850s. In the 1930s, and for many years afterwards, Ritz Crackers promoted a recipe for mock apple pie using its product, along with sugar and various spices.\n\nAlthough eaten in Europe since long before the European colonization of the Americas, apple pie as used in the phrase \"as American as apple pie\" describes something as being \"typically American.\" \" In the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, apple pie became a symbol of American prosperity and national pride. A newspaper article published in 1902 declared that \"No pie-eating people can be permanently vanquished.\" The dish was also commemorated in the phrase \"for Mom and apple pie\" - supposedly the stock answer of American soldiers in World War II, whenever journalists asked why they were going to war. Jack Holden and Frances Kay sang in their patriotic 1950 song \"The Fiery Bear\", creating contrast between this symbol of U.S. culture and the Russian bear of the Soviet Union:\n\nAdvertisers exploited the patriotic connection in the 1970s with the commercial jingle \"baseball, hot dogs, apple pie and Chevrolet\".\n\nModern American recipes for apple pie usually indicate a pastry that is 9 inches in diameter in a fluted pie plate, with an apple filling spiced with cinnamon, nutmeg, and lemon juice, and it may or may not have a lattice or shapes cut out of the top for decoration. One out of five Americans surveyed (19%) prefer apple pie over all others, followed by pumpkin (13%)\nand pecan (12%).\n\nThe unincorporated community of Pie Town, New Mexico is named after apple pie.\n\n\n"}
{"id": "159718", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=159718", "title": "Melba toast", "text": "Melba toast\n\nMelba toast is a dry, crisp and thinly sliced toast, often served with soup and salad or topped with either melted cheese or pâté. It is named after Dame Nellie Melba, the stage name of Australian opera singer Helen Porter Mitchell. Its name is thought to date from 1897, when the singer was very ill and it became a staple of her diet. The toast was created for her by chef and fan Auguste Escoffier, who also created the Peach Melba dessert for her. The hotel proprietor César Ritz supposedly named it in a conversation with Escoffier.\n\nMelba toast is made by lightly toasting slices of bread under a grill, on both sides. The resulting toast is then sliced laterally. The thin slices are then returned to the grill with the untoasted sides towards the heat source, resulting in toast half the normal thickness. Thus, it can be described as a twice-baked food (see rusk).\n\nMelba toast is also available commercially, and was at one time given to infants who were teething as a hard food substance on which to chew.\n\nIn France, it is referred to as \"croûtes en dentelle\".\n\nIn 1925, the Mayo Brothers prescribed the \"Eighteen Day Reducing Diet\" to Ethel Barrymore. It included Melba toast, which made the toast very popular at the time.\n"}
{"id": "160221", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=160221", "title": "Plum in madeira", "text": "Plum in madeira\n\nPlum in madeira is a popular dessert made with plum and madeira wine.\n\n"}
